He Drank His Whiskey Neat
Fiction by Dara PassanoY
ou shouldn’t have worn your coat but you hadn’t expected to be lugging your suitcase all the way from the train station. At least not on your own. You tell yourself it’s a compliment, a salute to your self-sufficiency that he hadn’t seen the need to meet you on the platform with a bouquet, or better yet a car.
The sun is high. You slide down the hill like a softening lump of cheese. In the 
Jardin Anglaise 
you stop to wipe your face, switch hands, keep plodding.
His building is on the other side of the lake, just past the 
jet d’eau
. It is a posh address but with none of the luxury that you’d been hoping for when he said Switzerland and you thought banker. (He’s a teacher.) You don’t know his surname so you buzz flats at random, dreaming of gelato.
You see him through the elevator grate. He’s waiting with the door open.
He isn’t quite as you’d remembered. From his guarded eyes and rigid smile you guess, you fear, you aren’t quite as he’d remembered either. Too late now, you laugh as you pull the grate open. I hope you have space for all my stuff. Oh, he shakes himself. Yes, of course.
Now that you’re here he is fussily male, aggressively hospitable. The entryway is shoes and coats and bags, hanging up and falling down and everywhere underfoot. You take off your coat but are afraid that if you let it go you might never find it again. He stares at the sweat marks on your shirt. Hastily, you shove the coat onto a hook already four garments deep.
There, you say, as if you have every right; as if you know where you are. You can take care of yourself and you think nothing of accepting invitations to stay with random men in their homes.
No, not random. He drank his whiskey neat. That shows class.
Sorry for the mess, he says, and this is not standard false modesty, this is an understatement.
I didn’t have to time to straighten up. Through the bedroom door you see the sheets are tangled, the mattress half-bare. The pillows are flat, dank, and stained.
And the kitchen. Every dish dirty, every pot crusty. His counter, which is not a counter but a broken washing machine, stinks of vinegar, like dirty feet. The kitchen table is so buried under junk you only know it’s there because the junk is higher than the floor.
Between you and the sink — you’re desperately thirsty, damn it — is a midden of empty bottles defended by a moat of coagulated beer.
I was just heading to the recycling centre.
You ignore this. You sure have a lot of bicycles, you say in the tone of a woman who compliments a hideous necklace so she can keep staring at it. There are seven bicycles. Three half-assembled, two fully disassembled, and two assembled but dripping oil.
I’ve started to hoard. He bites a hangnail. Maybe you can help?
Help.
You know, help me clean up and cart some of my junk to Salvation Army.
You smile and fling open the shutters and the balcony door.
The noise, he says, the pollution.
You don’t care. He has left a half-eaten bowl of pasta on the coffee table and a plate of old broccoli on the sofa. The walls are covered with concert flyers and movie posters, as if he were a teenager or a homesick boy in a dorm room and not a forty-five-year-old bachelor with a penchant for fine whiskey.
You ask him for his wifi password and he tells you he keeps the router unplugged lest the radio waves tamper with his grey matter.
Fully understandable, you say. Now it’s his turn to smile. Let’s go out.
He takes you for dinner and here, with this, this gesture and attention, things begin to improve. The strap of your dress slips off your shoulder and you leave it like that, with your shoulder bare. You enjoy the way it distracts him. You enjoy the candlelight in his eyes.
He calls you pretty, leans towards you, says do you remember when we met, in that airport lounge, and you both laugh.
You had met on a layover, between flights, going to and from in opposite directions and you had merged right away because travellers have such porous souls. But there hadn’t been enough time or privacy and that had been horrible, yet beautiful, and he had promised you many things over the complimentary canapés and you had believed them all because of the simplicity of it, the rightness. And because you’d been tipsy.
Well, no. Drunk. You’d been very drunk. But there had been reasons for that, good reasons.
I was drunk, you say, feeling an urgency for straight-dealing. I don’t usually.
Of course, of course. He waves this away. But he is frowning.
He orders a bottle of wine. I really don’t drink. His frown deepens. But when we met. Honestly, that was an exception. He doesn’t believe you. You don’t want to explain, it isn’t his business. He sends the wine back and orders a beer.
You change the subject, talk about your work. He talks about his work. It’s better now. He orders a second beer. You hint at failed relationships, he hints at the same. Enter beers three and four. You were in a hurricane once, and a tornado. You tell him these stories.
He has a story, too. In college he was cycling home from a party with his best friend and the road was dark but empty and he cut in front of his friend but his friend was following too close behind. Well. Their wheels glanced, that is what happened, no one’s fault, and his friend went over and he wasn’t able to get up in time. They hadn’t even seen the car coming.
You reach across the table and put your hand on his.
Your glasses are empty. The waiter takes the plates. The window is fogged with your breath and beyond it the city is shining through the darkness.
You arrive back at his place and it smells as badly as you remember. You open all the windows again and he follows behind you closing them again. It isn’t quite late enough to sleep. Dinner-as-foreplay wasn’t extensive enough for you.
A nightcap, he says with what might be a sneer. A chamomile would be lovely, you venture, and he laughs. He pours himself a whiskey. You try to remember how many beers he had over dinner. He turns from you to switch on the computer. But not the wifi.
You escape to the WC. It’s an actual closet, made even tinier by a snowboard against one wall, a pair of skis against the other, and a second snowboard jammed in overhead. The door only closes three-quarters. The toilet roll is perched on a map of France.
It’s distressingly small. The roll, that is. Not France. France is big. You wish you were back in France. You also wish you had thought to pack toilet roll.
The flat is silent. You hum, embarrassed of the noise, embarrassed of the door left ajar.
When you come out, he surprises you in the hallway and steals a kiss. Steals. It is a theft and you feel the loss of it. There are a finite number of kisses you will give in your lifetime and this man who has taken so little effort with himself on your behalf that the unshaven hair on the front of his neck almost entirely merges with the untrimmed hair at the back of his neck, has unfairly claimed one of them. And now he has claimed a second.
He side-steps you into the bedroom, where he stumbles over a box, cuing you to stumble over a stool. A pile of junk crashes to the floor. Sorry, you say. You hadn’t known the stool was his bedside table. There is a laundry rack in the way and three bureaus too many. It is impossible to reach the window and close the curtains but how can you leave them open, the neighbour is right there in the window, drying a salad bowl. He switches off the light and the neighbour leaves the window to watch TV.
Now, when you’d agreed to come you’d presumably agreed to sleep with him, but now that you’re here you can’t decide. If you do it like this, on the first night, it will be meaningless. If you do it later, then never see him again, that’s less meaningless and he might have his feelings hurt. We all have feelings, we all have nerve endings that get shorn. But you are not in the business of making bad situations worse.
Condom, you say, resigned.
They don’t work for me, he says, fumbling with his jeans. I can’t, you know, the sensation, I lose my…
You walk out.
His sofa is a filthy, floppy, salmon-coloured mound in which you sink nearly to the floor. He doesn’t complain when you make your bed there. You hear the refrigerator door open and close, hear a bottle cap clatter. In the ambient light from the balcony doors you try to guess what they are, that spray of desiccated flowers he’s got stuck in an old wine bottle on the top of the bookless bookshelf. There are two big speakers up there too, and three more on the floor. Given the size of the room, barely four meters by three, that’s enough bass power to stop someone’s heart.
In the morning you wash the dishes while he sleeps, then eat breakfast. He sleeps and sleeps. He sleeps some more. He sleeps until you’ve practically one leg over the balcony rail.
At last he gets up, trundles into the kitchen and makes breakfast, lunch really, on the plates you’ve washed, and coffee with the pot you’ve scrubbed.
Let’s go out, you say when he’s dropped his dirty dishes in the sink. Please.
He lends you a bike and you ride, he ahead and you behind, up into the hills where the rape fields — golden, shocking — are bound by green pastures and cliffs. It is beautiful. You take his picture. He takes your picture. You do not take a picture together but you are happy anyway. You are happy now. This is good. You are glad you came.
On the way back down to the city he takes you to see his friend, a wealthy recluse, a man who will have no opportunity to gossip about seeing you, the woman from the airport lounge. You ask him if he’s embarrassed of you and he gets angry. All of my other friends are away for the weekend, he says, what do you think this is. You don’t know.
The friend lives in a mansion with his mother behind a set of ancient, automated gates that creak open like a portal to Narnia. Your bicycles clatter down a wooded path that opens into a burst of sunshine. You jump off the bike and sink into a tended lawn.
He is big and lumbering, this friend, with wide hips and crooked brown teeth. He stares at you and you see him consider, then discard, the terrifying notion of addressing you directly. You walk away, to make it easier for him, and engage instead with his studio, with the installations he is creating. He works in the old servants quarters. They are bigger (and cleaner) than the flat where you are staying, but they’re a speck in comparison to his house, which is a speck in comparison to its grounds.
Let’s have a tour, you say when the friend is out of earshot. There are secret gardens here and you want to see them.
He gets angry, pulls you aside, checks to make sure you won’t be surprised.
Not today.
Why?
His mother. He checks again; the friend is not back yet. He is very respectful of his mother, he says. When she’s here he stays out of the house, he doesn’t make any noise, he even sleeps in the studio.
Why? Is she ill?
No. It’s him who’s ill, not her. She’s kind but he’s too respectful, always defers to her. I can’t tell you why. He avoids women. Can a person be asexual?
You look at the friend’s largest installation, it is right there on the front lawn, not hiding itself from mothers or best friends. Eight chainlink bed frames lined up and rusting in the sun. A wooden watch tower whose roof tips forward like a phallus that cannot quite reach, or has just finished reaching, its full potential.
Have you ever read the Patrick Melrose novels, you ask. He shakes his head. You sigh. You think the recluse could do better than to have a friend like this.
Finally it is your last night and you invite him for fondue to thank him for being your host and to celebrate, privately, that the toilet roll has withstood the test of time.
You look nice, you say, when he steps out of his bedroom in a grey silk shirt and trousers.
Thank you, he replies; are you really going to wear those shoes?
It’s a chilly night. You hold your hands up to the warm fondue pot while he orders a carafe of white wine and makes a point of telling the waiter one glass, just one glass, only one. One. You smile at him. Ha, ha.
Suddenly there are people he knows, friends, isn’t this unexpected, they kiss cheeks three times, you are just ordering, what a shame, we are just going. You fiddle with your fondue fork. Is he not going to introduce you? Where is Ana? Someone glances at you. Someone else coughs.
Oh, so sorry, he says, and tells them your name. You half-rise from your seat. They nod. We had better be going. More kisses. Say hi to Ana. You’ll be at Ralf’s next week?
He sits down again and the restaurant is loud but your table is quiet, as if a storm has just passed, has just whooshed away to hang, darkly, on the horizon, and the damage has yet to be assessed. Ana, you want to say, Ana? But you don’t really care.
It’s an on-again off-again thing, he says, finally, after the second carafe of wine has come. I didn’t lie to you.
Nor did you buy my plane ticket, or qualify how madly desperate you were to see me, or admit that when you couldn’t call me on a Saturday night it was because you were out with your girlfriend and not, as you insisted, because you were visiting your parents.
You do not say these things. You have pride. And anyway, you are not in love.
You shrug. He is relieved. You eat more than your share of the fondue.
Then dinner is over, at last, and you are ready to be off, to be off and to never be on again, but he turns to you and says, The thing is… You are straddling your bike and he is straddling his bike. The night has turned piercingly cold.
Yes?
The thing is I’m sick of being alone.
It bursts out of him — SICK — and you listen, because you must, but you aren’t sure he is speaking to you; he is addressing the night, the sky, the cold air.
That’s what I wanted, he says, to the night, for so long, to be alone, to have the freedom of deciding things for myself, of not having to think about where someone else might fit into my picture. I wanted my own picture, with just me in it. I didn’t feel any rush to change things, to be like other people, to pair off and get married the way everyone else was doing. I was having a good time, you know? After my friend died I wanted to live fully, immediately, make the most of everything. I took long cycling trips, met people along the way. I borrowed money from my parents, bummed in Australia for a year. But now I’m tired of it. I’m sick of being alone, always, of having no one to, I don’t know, share things with.
Yes, you say, and you nod.
I don’t understand why it never works out.
No, you say, and you shake your head.
You ride the bicycles home. The city lights guide you on your way, like frozen stars. You hold the handlebars with one hand while blowing on the other, then switch, and switch. Your teeth are chattering. He rides ahead, you ride behind; for two days it has been like this. He is done with you and you with him, you are neither of you what the other one wants so you pedal quickly, you fly, the streets are empty, it is a Sunday night and you never want to come back to Geneva.
You are crossing a street like that, zooming along, when suddenly he changes his mind, brakes, and cuts in front of you. It’s too fast for you to react in time. You stare. You stare at his back wheel as it flies at you.
But you are lucky. My god, you are lucky. For once in your ridiculous life you are lucky.
Your wheel misses his, though only just; by a centimetre, or less. Your heart, which had seized, starts beating again, beating madly, and you crunch the brakes, you are shaking. You stop at the curb and put a foot down. Your leg is shaking. You can hardly stay upright.
Ahead of you, all alone in the centre of the street, beneath the frozen stars, he is gliding homeward, oblivious.Dara Passano
 is the author of the 
The Guardian UK’s
 
Confessions of a Humanitarian
 series, and the satire collection 
Give Me My Chocolate or the Turtle Dies.
 Dara’s fiction and commentary have appeared in 
East&West
, 
Thought Catalog
, 
Crack the Spine
, 
The Perfume River Anthology
 and elsewhere.