Key Steps Throughout the Job Hiring Process
Katie Hughes Shares Her Essential AdviceFinding a job in Silicon Valley is an extremely difficult process. All candidates are highly intelligent, over achievers with very high work ethics, and possess a drive to succeed which separates them from applicants in other industries. So how do you set yourself apart and successfully find a job in tech? Well thankfully 
Katie Hughes
 from Draper, Fisher, and Jurvetson stopped by 
Tradecraft
 this week to share some insights on the topic. Katie is Head of Talent at DFJ where she works with the firm’s portfolio companies to create and drive their recruitment strategies. Here’s what she taught us…..
Before You Start….
There’s a level of presentation that’s not talked about too often in Silicon Valley when it comes to job hunting. It’s common to present yourself in a way that is conversational and casual when approaching people and networking. It’s a very fluid and collaborative process in Silicon Valley as opposed to the more formal process of showing up with your cover letter, resume, and academic transcripts. When prospects are pitching Katie, she prefers a short email that is brief and to the point with a link to their LinkedIn profile. People that are able to quickly build a rapport are preferred to people that make the opportunity more transactional and formal.
Foundations of Your Job Search
Define Your Wish List
: Make a wish list of companies you want to work for. This helps you be permissive. Writing down all the companies that are appealing to you, even if you believe you couldn’t get a job there, helps you extrapolate the reasons they’re appealing to you and it allows you to identify other companies that have similar values that you may not have considered. To help determine which kinds of companies you’re interested in, Katie usually asks two questions: 1) what sector? and 2) what stage? With regards to sector, is it consumer apps? Is it the on demand economy? Is it analytics software?, etc. As for stage, the factors include the number of employees, the amount of revenue the company is generating, how much capital have they raised?, etc.
Brand Halo
: If you’re looking to put a stamp on your resume and want to work at a company with a big name, it may be wise to work at a place that offers less potential upside or has a narrowly defined role. This may help you in the future in getting your next higher level role.
Role
: Some questions to consider are: What’s the scope of the role? What are the things you want to say you’ve done in your career? What are the important building blocks for that next step and can you get to those within the role?
People Network
: This is similar to Brand Halo, but has more of a mafia effect of working for a large company. People that you worked with there will go off and start new businesses and there’s an interesting ripple effect that takes place.
Equity
: Some questions to consider are: What’s the potential upside for you? What’s the amount of equity you might get and what will it be valued at? It’s important to be conversational, if not fluent, regarding the topic of equity.
Learning
: Who are you working with? Who are you working around? What are the projects you’re tackling? What’s the scope of the role?
Grab the Company’s Attention
LinkedIn
: Use LinkedIn to find people that work at companies on your wish list that have similar jobs to the one you want. Then send them a message. Here’s an example:
“Hey, I see you work at Instacart as a PM. I’m interested in that role and would love to learn more about your experience.”
These conversations are definitely worth having because it’s important to have an internal ambassador at your targeted companies. They will help get your information to the recruiter. They can also tell you what it’s like to work at the company and what the company’s interview process is like.
Katie hires for DFJ’s associates and partners in the venture firm. It’s a very coveted job and they won’t even consider someone unless that person finds a way to get introduced to them. They’re looking for people to be resourceful.
Anticipate a Company’s Needs
: Katie always finds it helpful when a candidate finds a need in one of their portfolio companies and explains how and why they’re the right person to solve that problem. For example, showing how and why you’re qualified to correct Tesla’s legislative issues in certain states would be very relevant. It demonstrates a real interest in the company and opportunity, and creates a more compelling narrative for why now and why you.
This is what Katie did at DFJ. Her job didn’t exist, but there was a need for it at the firm. So she wrote a job description and presented it to the partners.
What’s Going on Behind the Scenes When You’re Interviewing?
There are a couple different things taking place on the back end during the interview process. They are mostly based on the stage of the company.
Early Stage
: At an early stage company, things are just a cluster and everything is very chaotic. Usually, there’s very little record keeping and no active tracking system, so your follow up and consistency will be very helpful at this stage.
Mid-Level
: As the company grows, the more narrow the roles get. At this stage, the company is less open to generalists and people that don’t fit their specs.
Later Stage
: If you’re targeting a company that is going public soon, those companies don’t end up hiring many people during that time.
There are so many people that have to communicate on the back end and behind the scenes with regards to hiring you, so it really helps to keep in touch with your internal ambassador at the company throughout the entire process.
Don’t Be Afraid to Ask Questions!
: Be permissive in the types of questions you ask the recruiter and hiring manager during your interviews related to how you’re doing and preparing. Some useful questions include:
Do I possess the traits and skills you’re looking for? If not, what am I missing?
What are the remaining steps in the interview process?
What traits, attributes, and backgrounds do people that have been successful at this job possess?
Candidates often feel like they can’t or shouldn’t ask these questions. However, they are completely reasonable to ask.
Starting the New Job
When you start a new job, have lunch with as many people at the company as you possibly can. Ask them about their job, their experience working at the company, and how they fit into the organization. New hires often feel intimidated because there is so much to learn, but they want to be in the know with everything that’s going on. Just be open about the things you do and don’t know, especially about the product, the market, and the company. You basically have a few months where it’s permissible to ask dumb questions.
Ask for feedback early and often
: Some companies may not have performance based management or performance reviews in place, so creating your own structure around that early and asking your boss what he wants you to be tracked on is very helpful. It’s good to set that tone immediately.
The 30–60–90 Day Plan
: This is basically a plan you’ve created regarding what you want to accomplish the first 30, 60, and 90 days on the job. This is very effective and shows you can work autonomously, you’re self-directed, and takes initiative up front. Looking back on it, you may be completely wrong about most of the tasks you’re going to accomplish. That’s ok. The 30–60–90 day plan is more of about the message and signal it sends and less about accurately predicting future tasks.
Recruiting Tips for Early Stage Founders
One problem founders of early stage companies have is acquiring top talent when all they might have is a basic product and a vision. How do you get people fired up and excited to work for you? The answer is with storytelling. Telling a great story is just as important during the hiring process as it is when you’re getting customers and raising capital. You must know your audience. For example, what’s the value prop for a sales person or an accountant? Why would they want to work at your company? Understanding the roles and functions well enough to be able to recognize what really inspires and motivates prospective hires is essential.
Additionally, founders of early stage companies must realize that recruiting is going to take up half of their time. Those that spend less are setting their companies up for failure. Don’t hire a head of recruiting or an outside agency. Get out there and market yourselves and tell a great story. It can be fatiguing, but if you do it well and you have fun doing it, it can be very helpful in retention.Generally, getting a job is a real sales process. It has to be because you’re going to get a lot of “No’s” and you’re going to realize that a lot of jobs aren’t right for you. The more people you reach out to, however, the more you’ll see that interesting things will happen. Katie tells her companies that it takes 100 points of outreach to hire one rock star. You can apply a similar rule to your job search. You may kiss a lot of frogs, but the more conversations you have going on, the more likely you’re going to feel conviction about the job you end up choosing.
Thanks again to Katie Hughes for taking the time to speak at Tradecraft and providing such excellent and valuable advice. We really appreciate it!Feel free to reach out at dminutillo@tradecrafted.com or Twitter: @danny_minutillo.