What hiring a freelancer on Upwork, Toptal (and other sites) says about your company
For the past 3 years I’ve probably looked at more freelance job boards than anyone on earth. I’ve found over 6,000 high-quality gigs (and in the process thrown out more than 20X that many). I’ve noticed patterns emerge, not just about 
the places
 I find these opportunities, but also about the companies who use these places to find help. Where you hire not only determines who sees your job or project, it shapes the type of person you’re looking for. Here’s 1 word to describe how these places shape who you’re hiring (and how they rub off on you):Unprofessional
Upwork
The place people go in search of a deal. Deals that are a mirage. They don’t exist on Upwork. You’re just too busy scrambling to re-coup high fees levied on you (up to 20% per project for freelancers and 2.75% per transaction for clients) to notice. Upwork tries to make up for this with volume but just attracts more spam and shady applicants than actual talent. Not only does this severely decrease the chances you’ll find someone great, it means you lose a ton of your own valuable time in the process. This leads to unprofessional work and unprofitable (the other word I wanted to use for Upwork) projects for your company.
🔮 My crystal ball tells me: you’re not seeing results because you prioritize finding a deal over investing in excellence.Confined
Craigslist
Craigslist isn’t the worst. But it’s surely not great. Using Craiglist severely limits your reach. It’s unreasonable to expect the right freelancers for your project (from all over the world) to keep tabs on your specific
 COUNTY’S 
Craigslist section everyday. Especially for remote projects, it doesn’t make sense to post on Craigslist because you handcuff yourself.
🔮 My crystal ball tells me: you’re defaulting to the easiest option in other areas of your business too and it’s limiting your potential.Talentless
Toptal
Here’s a dirty secret: Toptal doesn’t screen its talent-pool for skills that will 
necessarily
 help you. Instead they put developers through computer-sciency tests that look good on paper but may or may not have be in anyway related to your project’s success. Their claim of only offering the 
‘top 3% of developers’
 is arbitrary at best. If you’re attracted to it, it’s actually an indicator you’re lacking knowledge that’s necessary in making a great hiring decision in a complicated field.
🔮 My crystal ball tells me: even if you find someone great you’ll struggle to manage them because you lack confidence in this area.Exctinct
Elance
You haven’t hired someone in a while right?
🔮 My crystal ball tells me: 💀Peaked
Poacher
If you’ve hired top-talent from another well-known company simply because they worked for another well-known company, it probably means you’ve paid a premium to get them. In an already inflated market, that means you over-paid. The talent you’ve acquired has probably done their best work and now you’re left with someone past their prime.
🔮 My crystal ball tells me: you’re believing too much of the hype surrounding your industry and are vulnerable to upcoming changes.Static
Stackoverflow
Most opportunities on Stackoverflow look the same. Every post is formulaic in look and feel. There’s zero personality around your company when you post there. That means you don’t stand out and your listing ends up feeling more like noise than anything else. Not a great way to start your relationship with a developer.
🔮 My crystal ball tells me: you’re drowning in vanity metrics because you emphasize bullet-list style requirements throughout your business.Locked-in
Linkedin
Similar to Craiglist you’re confined. Linkedin job posts aren’t just hard to find, they’re completely nonexistent unless you use the platform. Next time, try logging out of your account and looking for your job post. You won’t find it. Why? Because Linkedin’s interested in keeping people on Linkedin. That means they keep a very closed platform, and a lot of times you get stuck with the bill. You’re not the priority, you’re the product.
🔮 My crystal ball tells me: you’re not investing enough in your own audience so you’re at the mercy of too many other platforms.These are just a few of the options at your disposal. Curious where I recommend you look instead? This fortuneteller sees a valuable offer in your future. I actually recommend a free place to go for your next hire. I believe it’s better than any of the options listed above.
If you hire freelancers, I’d love to send it to you for free:
Download my recommended alternative for finding a freelancer you love to work with.
You’ll also get great articles like this one sent to your inbox periodically, not bad eh. Until we meet again!