3 reflections on what I’ve learned about hiring at a Seed stage startup

If there is one thing I am the most proud of as a founder it’s our team. Hiring isn’t something you think much about when it’s just two or three people working out of an apartment on nights and weekends, but then (hopefully), that day comes when there’s $1M in your bank account, a shiny new funding article in the press (here’s ours), and suddenly your life changes.
You can read all the books you want about hiring and team-building (and you probably should!) but at the end of the day, your approach, and what works best for your company will be uniquely different in many ways that you just can’t imagine until you go through the process.
The reality is, there are a ton of factors that go-into hiring that when combined together, make for a completely different situation with each hire, at each company, at each point in that company’s history. Things like the city you are in, the market you address, where your office is, and most importantly who else is on your team all play a part in the process.
A highly respected member of the tech community recently said some very nice things to us about the quality of the team we are building and it caused me to take a step back and really look in awe and say — “wow — we have one kick ass team!”
I wish I could say it was easy to build the team, and that everyone we interviewed worked out and was hired on schedule, but like most things at a startup, it didn’t go that smoothly. Instead we learned a lot of lessons the hard way, encountered a few strokes of good luck (which are rare), and missed our “planned” hire date just about every single time. There’s a lot we do differently now when hiring and like most things at a startup we’re still learning every step of the way.
As a Techstars alum one of the things that is incredibly important to me is giving back to the community so I thought now was a good time to take a step back and share a few things I’ve learned about going from two, to three, to four, to five and beyond.
Lesson 1: Avoid recruiters in the early days
When news got out about our funding the recruiters started pouring in. I’d say not a day goes by where I don’t get a random call from a recruiter. Now I’m not against recruiters, in fact I think they can make a very positive impact and make hiring at a startup a lot easier.
That being said, in the early days I do think it’s incredibly valuable to do the searching for yourself because of what you learn along the way. You’ll learn little things like MeetUp groups that have the kind of people you’re looking for (and those that don’t), what qualities to look for on LinkedIn, past companies that might yield people that are a better fit with your company. The list goes on, the point is that when someone just hands you a candidate, you miss the journey of getting to the candidate and there’s a lot you learn on the journey.
For us I’ve learned some companies that have similar cultures to ours and others that have very different ones. I’ve found MeetUp groups full of A-players, and some well, not. What I’ve learned is the unique places to look and qualities to look for that I just couldn’t have learned if we used a recruiter to make these key early hires.
Lesson 2: If you’re hiring a manager, don’t just interview their employers, interview their employees
While this one might sound fairly obvious to you, I can’t tell you the number of times I’ve heard of an early stage startup hiring a manager without ever talking to anyone that was managed by them.
Yes — you’ll still want to talk to co-workers and people that have managed the person you’re considering but if you want someone to manage people, you want to hear from the people they have managed.
Now let’s go a step deeper. When you talk to people that previously worked for the manager you’re considering it’s very unlikely they’re going to say negative things. If they do then that could be a red flag, but let’s assume that they say nothing but nice things because that’s the more likely scenario.
What you need to do is ask them questions that could tell you something that might actually make the candidate a less good fit for your company even though the answer to the question might be positive. Only you know the qualities you are looking for in a manager and so you can structure the questions you ask past employees so you can see if this manager has the same qualities you are looking for.
One of the things I look for is for a previous employee to say is that they would love to work with that person again without prompting. Another thing I look for is when employees talk about how the manager really took the time to learn how they work and optimizing things around their own personal style. That’s me, you might be looking for something different, the key is asking the questions that will reveal what you’re trying to learn while avoiding questions that have only a positive or negative answer since you’re likely going to always get a positive answer.
Lesson #3: Some of the most qualified people might not fit into your company culture
This will happen to you. Seriously, it will. You’ll find a candidate that checks every single box you can think of when it comes to skills. They know the programming language you use, they live two blocks from your office, heck they even know that obscure library that only one other person on your team knows. On top of all of this, they come highly recommended from someone you know and trust.
Hire them right?
Well not always. It’s easy to think that building a great company means finding people with the perfect skills, but if those people don’t match your company culture you could find all of those skills wasted since they can’t work with your team.
This is why it’s so critical to make sure to ask questions around company culture, take the candidate out with your team, let other team members interview them. Do everything you can to better understand how they will fit into your company culture because the person with the perfect skills can only put those to work in a culture that works for them and that might not be yours.