How to Hire the Right Talent
Employees are the backbone of any organization. As a result, hiring properly is the most important thing a company can do.

Why is it necessary to Hire the Right Talent?
There’s nothing more crucial to the success of an organization than bringing the right people onboard and encouraging their growth, especially if you consider a bad hire could cost you tens of thousands of dollars.
Hiring the right employee is a challenging process. But the process drives results in employee productivity, a successful employment relationship, and a positive impact on your total work environment.
Hiring the right employee enhances your work culture and pays you back a thousand times over in high employee morale, positive forward thinking planning, and accomplishing challenging goals. This is not a comprehensive guide to hiring, but these steps are key when you hire an employee.
Basically, the right people can make or break any profit-making enterprise, as they are the foundation upon which a company’s profitability depend.
How to Hire the Right Talent?

We all know that it only takes one bad apple to spoil the bunch, similarly a single bad hire could potentially ruin the whole team’s motivation. This will negatively affect productivity, and ultimately, impact the bottom line.
However, bringing in the perfect candidate to fill a role in your company is not an easy task. Potential hires that look good on paper do not always guarantee the right fit.
So, is the candidate sitting in front of you right for this job? How would you know? When market conditions are so volatile it’s hard to predict all the qualifications and attributes you’re going to need six months or one year down the road?
Hence, here are few tips on how to find and hire that right talent!
Tip 1) Treat Candidates Like Customers

This is the most important point. Treating candidates like supplicants not only alienates them, but gives your company a bad reputation. Instead, treat candidates like customers.
The goal for each phone and in-person interview is to have the person enthusiastically interested in getting your job, even if they are not a good fit.
Make sure that everyone who applies is given a genuinely fair shot at being considered, and that he or she receives follow-up emails and closure regardless of the outcome. You should remember that every candidate has friends and colleagues, hence more will be the exposure!
Tip 2) Ensure Job Analysis

Hiring the right employee starts with a job analysis.
A job analysis is a process used to collect information about the duties, responsibilities, necessary skills, outcomes, and work environment of a particular job. The information from the job analysis is fundamental to developing the job description for the new employee. The job description assists you to plan your recruiting strategy for hiring the right employee.
The job analysis enables you to collect information about the duties, responsibilities, necessary skills, outcomes and work environment of a particular job.
Tip 3) Have a Structured Interview Process

Following a clear set of guidelines during the interview process helps decrease confirmation bias, in which snap judgments are made when making hiring decisions.
Despite the interviewer’s best intentions, their innate set of beliefs usually affects the outcome of the interview. Google uses the same set of questions on every interview session to avoid this trap. They go a step further by allowing an independent committee to review interview results. Hence, giving up this critical decision point from direct managers. This helps to increase the possibility of a more objective outcome.
Tip 4) Limit the Number of Interviewers

Having a candidate run a complete cycle of interviewers is wasting both the candidate’s time and your team’s productivity.
The hiring manager is crucial to the planning. Some interviewers are simply gun shy and will say “No” to everyone because they are afraid of making a hiring mistake. Others say “Yes” even when it’s not the right fit because they don’t want to be “the bad guy.”
So, identify the people within your company who interview well, and consider having these few people be on the interview teams for roles outside their domain of expertise.
Tip 5) Be a Detective

Before hiring make sure to review credentials and applications to avoid blunders in the future. The work of reviewing resumes, cover letters, job applications, and job application letters starts with a well-written job description.
Effective background checks are one of the most important steps when hiring an employee. You need to verify that all the presented, sterling credentials, social media profiles, skills, education and experience are actually possessed by your candidate. Screen all applicants against the list of qualifications, skills, experience, and characteristics. You’ll be spending your time with your most qualified candidates when hiring an employee. And, that is a good use of your time.
Also, you can determine whether their salary expectations are congruent with your job. For various sales titles, you could refer this article List of Sales Titles.
Tip 6) Prefer Attitude and Personality Over Technical Skills

When it comes down to choosing between someone with a good work ethic versus the right skill set, the most successful businesses go for the former.
When it comes to finding the right candidate, attitude is a better gauge than the right skill sets. Technical know-how can be imparted, but a good work ethic is an innate quality that can’t easily be taught. Someone who is passionate about your brand will do whatever it takes to ensure that your company becomes a success.
Find ways to make people want to work for your organization so that good quality personality will want to join your team. Industry awards can increase your company’s profile, so make sure that you include these recognition programs in your marketing efforts to make it easier for talent to find you.
Tip 7) Ask the Right Questions

The job interview is a key tool employers utilize in hiring. Every job interview is a huge obstacle for any candidate. Many would even have nervous breakdowns. So the best way to test them would be to ask the right as well as apt questions.
It’s a powerful factor in hiring an employee. The job interview questions asked are critical in magnifying the power of the job interview to help you in hiring the right employee. So what are some other great questions to ask? John Schwarz, CEO and founder of workforce analytics company Visier, said answers to questions such as, “Who are you going to be 10 years from today?” and “What makes you get up in the morning and do what you do?” can tell you a lot about a candidate’s drive and ambition.
Interview questions that help you separate desirable candidates from average candidates are fundamental when hiring an employee. Thus, the right job interview questions matter to employers.
People say Time is Money. So, make the most out of your time to find the right talent. It’s important that he/she is someone who is not just technically capable but also a good fit for the company.
Companies that are successful in hiring have a process that includes attracting high-quality candidates, evaluating them in several different areas, and taking the time to get to know the people in different ways.