The Misconstrued Hiring Process
Part 1 —  For the potential employeeI’ve come to realize the idea of a proper hiring process is misconstrued. People seem to forget that it’s a mutual relationship between the employer and job-seeker, and both parties should be working toward the same goal — while holding each other in the same respect. I’ve gone on interviews with the intent to join the team and during some, knew I was no longer interested in doing so.
However, I made note of the experience of the companies entire process, the questions they asked for the position, what they offer and how they conduct themselves until the end. Going on a few interviews, both good and bad, gives you a good idea of what you like and dislike, along with what should and shouldn’t happen throughout.
After analyzing all of those experiences, I’ve broke the entire hiring process down into three parts: the initial contact, the interview and the follow up. And I’ve come to realize, within those parts of the process, there are basic principles to follow. So Job-Seekers, take note:
I. Initial Contact
Just a rule of thumb (I’ll note this for employers as well) — there are canned emails and then, there are canned emails that sound personal. Please stick with the latter. Companies hate initial email screw-up’s the same way you hate receiving job offers with no name addressed, or worse, another individuals name.
The Email
Employers 
will 
know when you’ve sent them a stereotypical canned email. Keep in mind, it’s more than okay to reuse emails, if you make it seem personal enough. When you do send them an email though, be sure to include:
A proper introduction.
 The industry you’re in will determine how you address the person receiving your email. While some are totally okay with a “Hello there!”, others would much rather open an email to “Dear Hiring Manager”. Very few industries would take kindly to the former.
Who you are. 
Give a brief on what it is you currently do, what you enjoy focusing on in your field and a one to two liner on your positive attributes as a worker (i.e. I enjoy taking on multiple tasks and enjoy reaching my goals.).
A proper subject line.
 I recommend putting the position you’re applying for here (i.e. “Application for Product Design position”).
Your reason for interest.
 What about the company interests and appeals to you? Why are you interested in working for this specific company? Be sure to include what both what you can do for them and what they, as an employer, can do for you.
Method of contact.
 Provide them with an email and phone number where they can reach you, if they too are interested. Suggest an interview and let them know you’re really interested in moving forward. It won’t hurt you, and it shows them you’re bold and really determined to join the team.
Attached here
 is a demo 
initial email
 including all of the pointers I’ve listed above. It was something I threw together quickly as an idea, but feel free to use tid-bits or all of it. Do keep in mind a lot of potential employers might be reading this as well, though ;).
Ultimately, you want to keep the email as close to the point as possible. Cover letters are for a mid to large sized explanation as to who you are, your work history and what you and the company will gain from you joining the team.
Attached here
 is a demo 
cover letter
 I created (by far one of the most bizarre, in depth and intense cover letters I’ve ever written). Be sure to always attach a cover letter as a PDF unless instructed to do otherwise. Don’t panic! It seems like a lot, but some companies don’t require, and in fact, dislike receiving cover letters. If that is the case, it’s okay make the email a 
little 
more beefy.
*Please note: 
Aside from the fact that everything I created uses Peter Pan and Disney names from a design position perspective, this is in no way shape or form the perfect email or cover letter. You need to take it, switch it up to what fits best for you, your goals and of course, basic info. Only then will it be perfect.II. Interview
The interview process should be light, friendly, but with clear intent to achieve one goal — see whether or not it is a right fit. I’m not going to tell you how to properly shake someones hand but some things I do recommend from both sides:
You’re there for a reason. 
Remember that when sweat is dripping down your forehead and your leg won’t stop shaking. They wouldn’t waste their time if they weren’t interested.
Smile and laugh. 
Be sure to smile throughout the interview. Not in a creepy way, the entire time, but when it’s appropriate. Oh and when the person interviewing you makes a joke, laugh – even if it’s lame.
Ask questions. 
Don’t hesitate to ask questions about the job. Common questions involve: What you
 
can expect from the position, company culture, benefits that come with being hired, and any other miscellaneous information that you can think of. If they weren’t already addressed by the interviewer, know that he or she is probably expecting them from you. Don’t be shy!
Research. 
Do your due diligence with research on the company before you step foot in the office. The last thing you want is to end up in the hot seat when the interviewer asks what you think of the company “motto” or their stance on an important belief for them.
Don’t break the ice. 
I wouldn’t be the one to break the ice and ask about salary if they haven’t mentioned it. Leave that for the next conversation or interview they ask you to come in for.III. Follow Up
The “Golden Rule” is to always-follow-up. After the interview, go home, kick off your shoes and send a follow-up email. In this email you’ll:
Say thank you.
 Thank the employer for their time and the opportunity.
Remember names.
 Mention that you enjoyed meeting Person A, Person B, etc. (along with the team, if applicable) and/or meeting whoever it was you were in contact with (Too many names to list? Address them as “the team”). You should always make it a point to remember key individuals, though.
Wrap it up.
 Thank them again and in a one-liner explain that you’re looking forward to hearing back from them in hopes of potentially joining the team.I’m sure there are plenty of tips and tricks out there for the job-seeker — which I encourage you to share. I’m not a master of the hiring process and every person is different. What works for one might not work for the other. If you have any other points I missed here or an opinion on what I wrote, 
I’d love to hear it
!
Be sure to look out for “The Misconstrued Hiring Process, Part 2 — For the Employer”Photo Credit: 
Luke Chesser