You’re Hiring All Wrong
I’ve been in HR my whole life, and I’ve seen company after company mess up hiring. It all starts with the first step: putting together a job requisition.
Here’s the real truth of how most managers approach that:
1) You either describe somebody who left that you wish hadn’t.
2) Or you describe a person with superpowers who doesn’t exist.
3) Or you write whatever it’s going to take to get it approved.
But this kind of hiring doesn’t work. It leads to bringing on people who can solve your problems of today, not those who can help you tackle the problems of tomorrow.
What You Should Do Instead
When you’re hiring someone, you need to think about what your goals are going to be once they’re on board — not what your goals are right now.
Ask yourself: If you’re doing things differently, then what would a new hire need to know that no one on the team knows how to do?
Then, backtrack.
If you had somebody that knew how to do a certain thing, what kind of background would they have so that they would know how to do it?
Then, look back at the team you have in place. You likely have a bunch of great people on the team already, so don’t hire a bunch more great people who are 
just
 like these great people.
Instead, go find some people who know how to do the things that you don’t really know how to do — and can solve your problem faster than if you put one of your current teammates on the problem for the next six months.
With this mind shift, you’re not recruiting by looking for somebody who checks off all the skills and experience boxes. You’re looking for somebody who can solve that problem you need solved down the road.
It comes down to figuring out what it is you’re trying to do first — then building a team to do just that.
When you look at hiring with future (not current) goals in mind, you start attracting people who can make a meaningful difference on your company’s growth.This piece was adapted and condensed from my interview on The Growth Show where I talk about the right way to build high-performing teams, the secret to building a cohesive company culture, and lessons I’ve learned from working with exceptional leaders.
Click the links below to listen to the podcast episode in 
Apple’s podcast app
, 
iTunes
, 
Overcast
, 
Stitcher
, 
Google Play
, or Soundcloud: