We Need To Talk About This Total Crap Hiring Practice
Adorable tiny office supplies from Flying Tiger.
About a year ago, I was actively looking for a new job. The kind of actively looking that involves waking up at 5am to job hunt for three hours before going to work, ducking into closets to take phone screens, and planning lots of “long lunches” with “friends from out of town.” I wish I would have documented my actions more carefully, lest the CIA ever take interest in my deception prowess.
During this time, I first noticed a hiring practice I was appalled by, but chalked up to anomaly and accident. Then it happened again, and again, and then one more time after that. It’s happening to my friends, too. Stop me if you’ve heard this one:
Step 1:
 Recruiter email. “Hi, got your resume, we’d love to connect.”
Wait four days.
Step 2:
 Phone screen. “So tell us more about what you’re looking for.”
Wait a week.
Step 3:
 Recruiter email. “We’d love to have you Skype with the hiring manager for this role.”
Wait three days.
Step 4:
 Skype interview. “Give me a little more info on your background.”
Wait three days.
Step 5:
 Recruiter email. “She had such good things to say, we’ll be in touch soon regarding next steps.”
Wait two weeks.
Step 6:
 Recruiter email. “So we’d love to have you come in and meet with a few more members of the team. Do you have four free hours in the middle of a Wednesday?”
Wait a week.
Step 7:
 In-person interview. “Why should we hire you?” x 3 people.
Wait two weeks.
Step 8:
 Recruiter email. “You’re one of our top candidates. For next steps, we’d like to see a full marketing plan for the three scenarios attached, by Friday, and btw even if we don’t hire you we might still use your ideas.”
Step 9:
 Sample project.
Wait two weeks.
Step 10:
 Recruiter email. “The team was very impressed with your project. We’ll be in touch soon about scheduling final round interviews.”
Wait three weeks.
Step 11:
 Recruiter email: “Yeeeeahhh….actually, we’ve decided to hold off on hiring for this particular role at this time. It was a pleasure meeting you, and we’ll be sure to reach out when we’ve more fully ironed out the company’s needs.”
Total:
 1 phone screen, 2+ interviews, 1 work sample, 12 weeks.
For nothing.
And we thought Tinder was offensive. If I can’t even pursue 
career advancement
 without getting ghosted, I should just fling myself from the poorly thatched roof of my Brooklyn apartment building that’s been painted the color of a brownstone but isn’t, in fact, a brownstone, right now.
When you’re job hunting, and you’re truly in need of a new role, you’re not in a good personal place. I’ve been desperate. Every email, every phone call could help to remove you from a toxic situation or like, destitution, and companies that spend three full months feeding and watering hope when they haven’t even fully assessed their hiring needs are turds of the highest order.
We’re all busy. We’re all in meetings all day. We’re all working at a Usain Boltian pace. That’s no excuse for toying with people’s lives. I mean really invading them. Interviewing while you’re still employed is a risk, we can’t so much as wear a new top and jeans without holes without colleagues assuming we’re doing it, and interviewing while you’re jobless is terrifying. If you start the hiring process you are asking presumably multiple people to engage in this very difficult and lengthy process, all without being really sure you should be doing it in the first place. You tool.
If you can’t spare the hour to sit down in a dirty conference room with eight dead dry erase markers on a table that hasn’t been disinfected since Obama’s first term and really talk through what’s missing, what’s needed, and what’s feasible before you go slapping the ‘ol job description up on LinkedIn, you’re committing a shitty business practice. It just so happens that no one outs you about it. Not even me. Because we want to hold onto our professionalism, regardless of whether or not you deserve it.
Uber can’t spit its gum out a window without the press and/or Twitter calling for it’s death, but companies that dangle hope in front of people who need it before they even have firm intentions to hire always get to save face. Not only save face, but get away with this bullshit. There are no consequences for them whatsoever. Just a “k, byeeee” and we’re left out on a smelly NYC sidewalk wondering what the fuck just happened, with no recourse. Back to LinkedIn, I guess. My hope is that in discussing what’s happening in general, we can reduce the frequency with which it happens at all.
To those of you currently taking calls in stairwells and vacation days to interview, hang in there. Your motivation is about 90% of what you need to improve your day-to-day existence (because that’s what a job is, when you think about it). I believe in you, I think things are going to work out for you, and I’d hire you–if I needed to.