A Complete List Of UX Deliverables
by 
Nick Babich
The list below contains most common deliverables produced by UX Designers as they craft great experiences for users. For better readability, I’ve combined the deliverables according to UX activities:
User Research
Market Research
Design
Testing
For each item in the list you’ll find additional links or video with detailed explanation or best practices.
Let’s start!User Research
Personas
Persona is a fictional character created to represent a user type that might use a product in a similar way. Personas make it easier for designers to create empathy with users throughout the design process.
Persona is a fictional character that highlights behaviors, needs and motivations of the target users. Image credit: 
xtensio
Related links:
Getting the most out of personas - UXM
9 minutes read Personas are great. No seriously, they are the best thing since sliced bread. I can't think of any…
www.uxforthemasses.com
Predictive personas - InVision Blog
Anybody who's spent time on a design team has almost certainly encountered the persona. There's a reason for that-the…
www.invisionapp.com
Creating Personas | UX Booth
Cooper, co-founded by industry giant Alan Cooper and his wife Sue, is a leading user experience and service design…
www.uxbooth.com
User Flow
A visual representation of the user’s actions to complete tasks within the product. Visualized user flow makes it easier to identify which steps should be improved or redesigned.
User flow helps build a “common understanding” of each page of your app or site. Image credit: 
Michael Pons
Related links:
Stop Designing Pages And Start Designing User Flows
For designers, it's easy to jump right into the design phase of a website before giving the user experience the…
www.smashingmagazine.com
Creating Perfect User Flows for Smooth UX
If someone asked you to define the word "flow" or describe an example of one, what would you say? Would you immediately…
www.uxpin.com
A shorthand for designing UI flows
Flows are just as important to good interfaces as individual screens are. Customers don't land on screens from out of…
signalvnoise.com
Experience Maps
A diagram that explores the multiple steps taken by users as they engage with the product. Experience map allows designers to frame the user’s motivations and needs in each step of the journey, creating design solutions that are appropriate for each.
A simple experience map reflects one possible path during one scenario. Image credit: 
effectiveui
How to create a customer journey map
Related links:
All You Need To Know About Customer Journey Mapping
"Stories have defined our world. They have been with us since the dawn of communication, from cave walls to the tall…
www.smashingmagazine.com
How to Create a Customer Journey Map - UX Mastery
Despite best intentions and mountains of data, many organizations continue to offer lackluster experiences for their…
uxmastery.com
Use Cases
A use case is a written description of how users will perform tasks in your app. It outlines, from a user’s point of view, an app’s behavior as it responds to a request. Each use case is represented as a sequence of simple steps, beginning with a user’s goal and ending when that goal is fulfilled.
Use case is a list of actions or event steps, typically defining the interactions between a user and a system, to achieve a goal.
Related links:
Use case - Wikipedia
In software and systems engineering, a use case is a list of actions or event steps, typically defining the…
en.wikipedia.org
Smart UX: Use Cases - Usability Geek
Triggers. Actors. Flow. Complexity. These are words that come to mind when we hear someone say " use case ". Use cases…
usabilitygeek.com
Storyboards
Storyboards are illustrations that represent shots that ultimately represent a story. In UX this stroy illustrates the series of actions that users need to take while using the product. Translating functionalities into real-life situations, helps designers create empathy with the user.
Smile and sadness on human faces can add emotions to your story and it comes alive in the hearts and minds of your audience. Image credit: Chelsea Hostetter, Austin Center for Design
Related links:
Storyboarding in UX Design
by Nick Babich
uxplanet.org
Storyboarding in the Software Design Process
Using storyboards in software design can be difficult because of some common challenges and drawbacks to the tools we…
uxmag.com
Market Research
Competitive-analysis report
Analysis of products competitors that maps out their existing features in a comparable way. Report helps you understand industry standards and identify opportunities to innovate in a given area.
A competitive analysis allows you to assess your competitor’s strengths and weaknesses in your marketplace and implement effective strategies to improve your competitive advantage. Image credit: 
yellowpencil
Related links:
Competitive Analysis: Understanding the Market Context
"While user-centered design focuses on user needs/tasks, and information architecture focuses on content, these two…
boxesandarrows.com
Conducting a Solid UX Competitive Analysis
Most people are familiar with the concept of a competitive analysis; it's a fairly standard business term to describe…
danforth.co
Design
Moodboards
A collaborative collection of images and references that will eventually evolve into a product’s visual style guide. Moodboard allows UX desigenrs to show stakeholders and teammates a proposed look for the product before investing too much time or money on it.
A moodboard is a great tool for stopping to check that your idea of the app’s/site’s look and feel matches your stakeholder’s. Image credit: 
usabilitygeek
Related links:
Mood boards are for more than inspiration - InVision Blog
I am a UX designer. That's fun to say, because it's a job that didn't really exist a few years ago. I've worked with…
www.invisionapp.com
How a Web Design Mood Board impacts User Experience Design
branding guideline communication style personality This creative process also provides designers with a golden…
www.protofuse.com
Sketches
Sketching is a quick way of visualizing an idea (e.g. new interface design) by using paper and pen. Sketches are useful to validate product concepts and design approaches both with team members and users.
Sketching is a useful tool for validating product concepts and design approaches both with team members and users. Image credit: 
David Sleight
Related links:
UX Sketching
Why is it necessary? 
uxplanet.org
The art of UX sketching and paper prototyping
Tips and tricks of “paper prototyping”.
uxplanet.org
5 Tips from 5 Designers to Improve Your UX Sketches
It's the beginning of a new project. You've got all these ideas bouncing around your head, but they're too incomplete…
www.uxpin.com
Wireframes
A visual guide that represents the page structure, as well as its hierarchy and key elements. Wireframes are useful when UX designers need to discuss ideas with team members/stakeholders, and to assist the work of visual designers and developers.
Designers often use wireframes as the skeletons for mockups
Related links:
UX Wireframing: Bedrock of Interface Usability.
In 4th BC Plato said: “The beginning is the most important part of the work”. Almost 24 centuries since then his words…
uxplanet.org
What is a Wireframe: Designing Your UX Backbone
The logical place to start the actual design process is with a rough wireframe. This basic documentation is simple…
www.uxpin.com
Prototypes
A prototype is a simulation or sample version of a final product, which is used for testing prior to launch. The goal of a prototype is to test products (or product ideas) before spending lots of time and money into the final product.
Low fidelity paper prototype
High fidelity prototype in 
Adobe XD
Related links:
Considering Prototypes | UX Booth
Although prototypes have been used in other domains for quite a while, their value to the design & development of…
www.uxbooth.com
What a Prototype Is (and Is Not) | UX Magazine
In case of a paper prototypes the major advantage is that you can use the same pencil sketches you initially began your…
uxmag.com
Testing
Quantitative Survey
Questions that provide numbers as result. Quick and unexpensive way of measuring a level of user satisfaction and collecting feedback about the product. Survey is a quick way to collect information from a large number of users but their obvious limitation is lack of any interaction between the researcher and the users.
Related links:
Better User Research Through Surveys - UX Mastery
Online surveys are commonly used by marketers, product managers, strategists and others to gather feedback. You've…
uxmastery.com
Usability report
Usability report summarize usability findings in a clear, precise and descriptive way that helps the product team identify the issue(s) and work toward a solution. When reporting results from a usability test, UX designer should focus primarily on the findings and recommendations that are differentiated by levels of severity.
Related links:
Making Usability Findings Actionable
For usability testing to be valuable, study findings must clearly identify issues and help the team move toward design…
www.nngroup.com
Analytics report
Numbers provided by an analytics tool on how the user interacts with your product: clicks, user session time, search queries etc. Analytics report can also “uncover the unexpected”, surfacing behaviors that aren’t explicit in user tests.
Google Analytics
Related links:
Complete Beginner's Guide to Analytics | UX Booth
Analytics is more than just a numbers game. It's a way of tracking and analyzing user behavior over time. In this…
www.uxbooth.com
How A/B Testing And Analytics Can Make You A Better Designer
Metrics can be a touchy subject in design. When I say things like, "Designers should embrace A/B testing" or "Metrics…
www.smashingmagazine.comHave more deliverable to share? Please let me know in the comments!
Follow UX Planet: 
Twitter
 | 
Facebook