Image credit: designshack
Button UX Design: Best Practices, Types and States
by 
Nick Babich
Buttons are an ordinary, every-day element of interaction design. Despite this, because buttons are a 
vital element in creating a smooth conversational flow 
in web and apps, it’s worth paying attention to these basic best practices for buttons. Also we’ll go over button types and states — important information you need to know to create effective buttons that improves the user experience.
Best Practices for Buttons
Make Buttons Look Like Buttons
Think about how the design communicates 
affordance
. How do users understand the element as a button? Use 
shape 
and
 color 
to make the element look like a button.
Groupon 
Sign in
 form focus on the primary action.
And think carefully about touch target 
size 
and padding when designing. The size of buttons also play a key role in helping users to identify these elements. Various platforms provide guidelines on minimum touch targets. Results of an 
MIT Touch Lab 
study found that averages for finger pads are between 10–14mm and fingertips are 8–10mm, making 10mm x 10mm a good minimum touch target size.
Image Source: 
uxmag
Location and Order
Put buttons where users can 
easily find them or expect to see
. For example, 
iOS UI guidelines
 show known location for buttons
Mind the order and position of buttons.
 The order that buttons go in, especially if there are corresponding pairs (such as ‘previous’ and ‘next’) is important. Ensure the design puts emphasis on the 
primary or most important action
.
In example below we use red for the button that performs a potentially destructive action. Notice how the primary action is not only stronger in colour and contrast, but also is on the right hand side of the dialog.
“Delete” button is more prominent than “Cancel” button.
Labels
Label buttons 
with what they do. Add a clear message of what happens after the click.
Same example as above but without proper text labels. Feel the difference?
No labels for buttons.
Call to Action (CTA)
Make the most important button (especially if you use them for 
calls to action
) look like it’s the most important one.
Create Resume is clearly a CTA button.
Button Shapes
Usually, you’ll want to make buttons 
square or square with rounded corners,
 depending on the style of the site or app. Some research suggests that rounded corners enhance information processing and draw our eyes to the center of the element.
Rounded rectangular button
You can be more creative and use other shapes such as circles, triangles or even custom shapes, but keep in mind the latter might be a bit more risky.
Floating action button
 is a good example of custom shaped button.
Be sure to maintain 
consistency 
throughout your interface controls, so the user will be able to identify and recognize your app user interface elements as buttons.
Button Types and Behavior
1. Raised Button
Raised Button typically rectangular button that 
lifts
 (the shading indicates that it is possible to click). Raised buttons 
add dimension to mostly flat layouts
. They emphasize functions on busy or wide spaces.
Use
Inline (to give more prominence to actions in layouts with a lot of varying content). Use raised buttons to 
give more prominence to actions
 in layouts with a lot of varying content.
Behavior
Raised buttons lift and fill with color on press.
Source: 
Material Design
Example
Raised buttons 
stand out
 more than flat buttons. Example for Android application.
Source: 
Material Design
2. Flat Button
Flat buttons do not lift, but fill with color on press. The major benefit of flat buttons is pretty simple — they 
minimize distraction from content
.
Flat button on app canvas.
Use
In dialogs (to unify the button action with the dialog content)
Flat buttons in Android dialog.
On toolbars
Flat buttons on toolbar. Source: 
Material Design
Inline with padding, so the user can easily find them
Flat buttons. Source: 
Material Design
Behavior
Source: 
Material Design
Example
Flat button in Android application dialog.
Flat buttons in dialog. Source: 
Material Design
3. Toggle Button
A toggle button allows the user to change a setting between two (or more) states.
Toggle button.
Use
Most common toggle button is used as On/Off button in preferences.
Also Toggle buttons can be used to group related options. But your layout should be 
arranged 
in a way to convey that certain toggle buttons are part of a group. Also toggle button requires:
Have at least three toggle buttons in a group
Label buttons with text, an icon, or both
Toggle button with one option is selected. Source: 
Material Design
.
Icons are appropriate for 
toggle buttons 
that allow a single choice to be selected or deselected, such as adding or removing a star to an item. They are best located in 
app bars
, 
toolbars
, 
action buttons
 or 
toggles
.
Toggle button for Twitter “Like” . Source: 
Ryan Duffy
It’s a very important to choose right icon for your button. I’ve cover this topic in article 
Icons as Part of an Awesome User Experience
.
Example
Apple iOS use toggle buttons for Settings section.
4. Ghost Button
Ghost buttons are those transparent and empty buttons that have a basic shape form, such as a rectangular. They are generally bordered by a very thin line, while the internal section consists of plain text.
Different ghost buttons. Source: 
Dadapixel
Use
Using ghost button as a primary CTA is 
usually not such a good idea
. You can see Bootstrap example and ghost button 
Download Bootstrap
 which looks the same way as their main logo which may 
confuse users
.
Download Bootstrap is a button. Have you notice that?
Ghost button is best used for 
secondary or tertiary content
, since it will not (or should not ) compete with your primary CTA. You ideally want the user to see your main CTA and then (if not relevant) skip over it to the secondary button.
Positive action has much higher contrasts and user sees a clear action.
Primary button (CTA) is Purchase Now and ghost button is a secondary button.
Behavior
Normal state (left) and Focused state (Right). Source: 
Dadapixel
Example
AirBnB website has ghost buttons for action “Become a Host”
AirBnB website.
5. Floating Action Button
Floating action button is a part of Google Material Design. It’s a circular material button that 
lifts 
and displays an ink reaction on press.
Use
Floating action buttons are used for a 
promoted action
.
Behavior
They are distinguished by a circled icon floating above the UI and have motion behaviors that include morphing, launching, and a transferring anchor point.
Choosing Button Type
Choosing a button style depends on the 
primacy of the button
, the number of containers on screen, and the screen layout.
Button type selection suggested by Google Material Design.
Z-depth.
Function:
 Is button 
important and ubiquitous enough
 to be a floating action button?
Dimension:
 Choose button type 
depending on the container 
it will be in and how many z-space layers you have on screen.
Layout:
 Use primarily
 one type of button per container
. Only mix button types when you have a good reason to, such as emphasizing an important function.
Button States
This point is not so much about how the initial button looks like for the user, but it’s about hovering a button and finding that 
nothing changes. 
User might gets confused: “Is it a button, or not. Now I have to click to find out if that thing that looks like a button is actually a button. Well...”
Button isn’t a one-state object.
 It’s
 multi-state
. And 
providing a
 
visual feedback
 to the users to indicate current button state should be a top priority task.
Normal State
Main rule for this state—button
 should look like a button
 in a normal state. Windows 8 is a good 
bad example
 of such problem — it hard for users to know if things are clickable or not in a Settings menu.
Buttons in Normal state in Windows 8.
Focused State
Offering 
a good visual feedback
 to users that they’re hovering over a button is good practice. The user instantly knows their action was accepted and they want be delighted by visual rewards.
Source: 
CSS Buttons
Pressed State
By animating different elements of your design you can add a bit of excitement and 
delight
 your users with creative and helpful motion.
Source: 
Colin Garven
Inactive State
There are two possibility — either
 hide a button
 or 
show it in disabled state
.
Arguments for hiding the button:
Clarity
. Only showing what is needed for the task at hand.
Save estate.
 It allows you to change the controls, using the same space for different means. This is handy when there is a lot going on. Gmail does this.
Gmail hides unused buttons.
And makes it visible only if user made an appropriate action.
Arguments for using a disabled state:
Show the action possibility.
 Even if button isn’t in use, the user has a chance to learn that the action is possible. You may even have a tooltip explaining the criteria for use.
Control location.
 The user can learn where controls and buttons live within the interface.
Disabled state button
Conclusion
Button is meant to
 direct users 
into taking the action you want them to take. A smooth handover keeps the conversation flowing along; glitches such as an unable to find a right button, at best, as interruptions and, at worst, as breakdowns.
Button UX design is always about recognition and clarity. Think of the web or app as a conversation started by a busy user. The button plays a crucial role in this conversation.
Follow UX Planet: 
Twitter
 | 
FacebookOriginally published at 
babich.biz