Why fundraising is really, really hard. Until it’s not.
And how to avoid the early mistakes I made.So, you’re the founder of an early stage startup. Probably pre-product. Definitely pre-funding. But I bet you’re so excited about your idea that you’ve been pounding the pavement, calling in favors for intros, and talking to potential investors already. Anyone and everyone needs to hear about this thing!
STOP.
RIGHT. NOW.
Why? Because as a first-time founder, there’s about a 99.9999% chance that your fundraising approach totally sucks right now. And you’re not getting anywhere.
For most companies, fundraising is really, really hard…right up until it’s not.
But what makes it not so hard all of a sudden?
One of three things happens:
You suddenly figure out a better, more compelling way to tell the story of your business, which explains why an investor needs to invest 
right now
.
Some known investor or person who’s a big name related to your industry signs on as an investor.
3. Your traction goes sick and everyone wants into the deal. Hooray!
The thing you may not realize is: before one of those three things happen, almost every conversation you have with a potential investor is going to either result in a 
nice chat
 and no money offered, or a slightly to overtly 
negative signal
 being sent to the investor because they deem your company unready for investment.
Remember: investors are people. People respond to things that solve a problem or need that they have. What problem or need does an investor have? Ask yourself that question for every person you are planning to meet. 
(Pro tip: check out the 
Refresh
 app for a cool way to auto-create a dossier on the people you’re meeting.)
For angels, the answer might be that they enjoy being around vibrant startup scene and offering the benefit of their experience (plus financial support).
For institutional investors, obviously the problem/need is different: they have a fiduciary duty to their Limited Partners to produce a specific financial result by investing their money wisely.
Your job is to tailor your message to reflect how you solve that problem or fill that need for the person across the table from you.
So, you’re probably thinking, that’s nice and all, but 
how do I make one of those three things happen?
My practical advice to you is this:
Get something launched NOW. Start proving that people want to use and ideally pay for your thing. It doesn’t have to be perfect, it will likely bear no resemblance to the full blown version you have in your head, but you absolutely must start proving your thesis.
In the week between now and when you get that done ;) put up an email capture form on a landing page. You could and should be constantly building your list.
Work on a concise and compelling one-liner. If have to read it more than once before I understand that you are trying “to help the Yale Whiffenpoofs manage their group activities and finances” or whatever…you’re doing it wrong. People—especially investors—are busy and have the attention span of a gnat. They don’t want to have to do work to figure out what you do.
If they aren’t already, get people using the MVP. Now. For free. Then ask them how to make it better. Then, do that. Rinse and repeat.
Start charging for premium services (or don’t…depending on your business model). Either way, for the love of cheese, figure out a business model. You’re not Facebook or Twitter or Tumblr or WhatsApp. You are building a business here. That means it needs to have a way to make money.
6. Memorize this: 
AARRR
.
 Live it, breathe it, love it. It’s your lifeblood.
7. When you have proven that you can both build a thing, and get people to use that thing, 
then
 you are ready to go talk to investors. 
And not before then.
8. Last but definitely not least: 
have fucking fun
 ☺ That’s what this is all about. That’s why we do a startup, and not some boring job shuffling WENIS reports.I hope this is at least tangentially helpful. Feel free to ignore as much of it as you choose. And of course, let me know if I can provide more color.
If you’d like to punch me now, I can understand that. Resist your urges, and write me a nasty note instead. Then go build your company.
If you’d like to kiss me, well…that’s another story altogether.