Five Things They Didn’t Tell You When You Signed Up to Fundraise.
Don’t worry — I’ll fill you in.
Fundraising can be an incredibly rewarding pursuit. It can also be incredibly frustrating, heartbreaking, and thankless.
Ouch.
Everyone learns tough lessons in the process of developing an effective ask, but those hurdles don’t have to stop us in our tracks —
 if
 we’re willing to embrace those lessons and keep going. 
If.
(Did I mention 
if
?)
Here’s what they didn’t tell you:
5. No one has to give you money.
 It’s true. Not your best friends, not your co-workers, not even Mom and Dad… no one, actually, even if they love you. In fact, there isn’t a 
single person on the face of this earth
 obligated to support what you support, just because you support it.
Did you contribute to their cause? That’s awesome. Are they required to reciprocate? Nope.
Do they have lots of money to give away? That’s awesome. Are they required to give it to you? Nope.
Are you behind in your donation goals? That’s too bad. Does that mean other people should help you make those goals? Nope.
In fact, if the word “should” creeps into your ask, it’s already off the rails. Why? Because…
4. It’s none of your business what other people do with their money.
 This is a tough one, especially when other people have a 
lot 
of money. You see them spending on stuff that doesn’t seem nearly as important as your mission in the grand scheme of things, or contributing to causes that don’t seem as valuable as the one you believe in. So frustrating!
If they would just give a 
little
 — an amount they wouldn’t even 
miss
 — you could achieve more of your goals. Why are their priorities so out of whack?
Well, actually, they probably aren’t. Or maybe they are, but…
3. What’s important to you might not be to others. And that’s okay. 
Maybe they don’t share your passion for a particular area of charitable work. Or maybe they do, but they’ve made a financial commitment elsewhere. Maybe they’ll decide to contribute in the future. Maybe they already give to another organization doing similar work. You don’t know — and frankly, they don’t owe you any answers.
It’s also not on them to find the overlap between what they value and what you value. 
You’re
 the one tasked with that particular Venn diagram, and it takes some effort (and patience) to figure it out. And if they never hop a ride on the SS Shared Vision?
2. People are not heartless or ignorant or selfish if they don’t give. 
How can they ignore your ask? Can’t they see how critical the need is? How can they turn a blind eye when they could make a difference? Why are they so 
selfish
? What’s 
wrong
 with people these days?
If you can afford ____, you can afford to give, 
right
?
These are the things we say to ourselves when our expectations are high, and the donations aren’t. It’s remarkably easy to judge people when we feel we’ve got the moral high ground.
Unfortunately, that kind of judgement creates a slippery slope away from that moral high ground — and suddenly, 
we’re
 the ones being uncharitable. One more time: it’s not up to you what other people value… and they aren’t “bad people” because they choose to value different things than you do.
And speaking of value…
1. Never assume the value is obvious. 
This is the number one mistake many of us make when we ask for money: we assume people know a) why the need we’re trying to meet is an important one; b) how the cause is personally relevant to us; c) what kind of impact their contribution would make; and d) why our organization is worth backing. Yes, it’s hard to fit all that information into a brief ask, but you can always point folks to your vision, mission, and impact if it exists somewhere — and, oh boy, it should.
Sometimes you might even have to wait on your pitch if you don’t have the time or space to do more than hold out your hand. Sure, some folks won’t need the whole story. Sometimes they’ll give just because they like you. They’ll assume if you support it, it’s worthy of support — and that’s great.
But “give because I said so” isn’t a sustainable strategy, and it won’t work terribly well beyond your inner circle (if it even works there!)
If you want people to join you on a journey, it’s up to you to tell them 
where
 you’re headed, 
how
 you’re planning to get there, 
why
 you want them to come along, and 
what’s
 going to happen when you arrive. Be willing to share your map as you go, too.
So are these five things impossible obstacles to raising money?
I’ve spent a lifetime being part of, and working for nonprofit organizations. I’ve seen how disheartening and divisive the process of fundraising can become when people make a personal investment in a cause… and then take it personally when others don’t. It can lead to broken relationships, failed initiatives, and even the dissolution of organizations — organizations that should have continued to do good work.
But it doesn’t have to be like that. We can all do better.
If you love a cause, love what you love enough to do it justice. Then trust the people around you to respond to their own mind and heart and gut the way you’ve responded to yours.
And if they choose to give to the thing you love?
Say thank you… and then 
do it all over again
.