Fundraising For Your Bot Startup
It’s been a crazy month. I think it’s going to get even crazier.
Ever since Facebook announced their bots platform at f8, developers, investors, and brands can’t stop talking about bots.
I have seen the hype first hand (everything on this list happened in the past 30 days):
I created 
a Facebook group for bot makers
, it now has over 4,000 members. It is the #1 bot group.
I created the 
Chatbots Magazine on Medium
, it got over 100,000 views in the past month. It is the #1 bots publication.
I wrote an 
introductory guide to chatbots
, it got over 25,000 views in the first week. It is the #1 most viewed chatbots guide.
I’ve been contacted by A LOT of fortune 500s asking for advice about bots.
I’ve had conversations with over 200 bot developers.
I’ve talked to almost every major funded bot company.
And… most pertinent to this email… I have been contacted by a TREMENDOUS amount of investors interesting in investing in bot companies.
Investors are very very interested in chatbot companies.
They haven’t made a lot of investments yet, but they are currently looking for the teams who they believe will create the snapchats, Instagrams, and Twitters of the bot world.
They don’t know what these look like though. They have no idea. So, if you think you are working on the next big chatbot (the first big chatbot?) you should definitely be talking to these investors and showing them what you are up to.
And this is something I can help with.
If you are working on a bot company, or working on putting together a bot company, 
I will introduce you to investors who I believe would be interested in talking to you.
 I can’t introduce everyone, but if you are a bad ass I will do everything I can to help you.
To get introduced to the investors I know, 
fill out this form
.
❤
Matt Schlicht
p.s. If you want to chat, 
hit me up on Twitter
, 
Facebook
, or send me an email at matt@chatbotsmagazine.com right now.
Enjoyed the article? Click the ❤ below to recommend it to other interested readers!