A fundraising plan for CASH Music
Raising money sucks. It feels off-mission, it’s easily a seven out of ten on the soul-crushing scale, and feels impossible until it just isn’t anymore.
The reality is that fundraising is a vital part of any organization. My fellowship with the 
Shuttleworth Foundation
 has allowed 
CASH Music
 to focus on building, but my three year term is up on March 1, 2017. So effective immediately, my role is changing. The best way for me to serve our mission of sustainability for musicians is to grow the organization and ensure we have the funding to continue.
In the past I’ve viewed fundraising as a chore. I felt lucky when it “just worked out.” The truth is it never just worked. Friends who believe in the work we’re doing made it work for us. I took that for granted. Never again. I believe in the work we’re doing. I believe that not only do musicians deserve sustainable career options, but that it’s vital for us as a culture that they feel empowered in those careers so they use their voices to shape the world around us. I believe in CASH Music, so I’m going to do the work.
Fundraising isn’t a chore. It’s a challenge. And we’ve got a plan.
First, some background. CASH Music has an annual budget around $400,000 USD. With it we pay three full-time and two part-time people, rent an office, cover travel and taxes and pencils and such.
A number like $400K makes me think “holy shit that’s so much money” but it doesn’t even cover everything. We’re supported by companies like 
Rackspace
 and 
MaxCDN
 who give us free access to services, or 
MailChimp
 who never fail to support our efforts by sponsoring new efforts that wouldn’t happen without their support. The truth is that $400K isn’t a particularly healthy budget for an organization doing work at the scale we do.
With that $400,000 we support over 10,000 musicians using our free and open platform. We just launched Watt, a new publication with unbiased nonprofit learning and editorial for and by artists. There’s open venue data, site templates, and so much more on the horizon.
I want to see what we can do with a million dollar budget and five people on staff. I want CASH Music to grow.
Great. So what kind of money is out there?
I’m cribbing a lot of this from my friend 
Geoffrey MacDougall
, but let’s take a look at typical sources of nonprofit funding and their fit for CASH Music:
Grants
For many nonprofits and mission-driven organizations, grants are the starting point for funding. They’re usually tied to specific projects, always to activity and mission, and provide capital to get to a next stage of evolution. For CASH Music they’re mostly a pipe dream.
We fall between funding areas. Arts foundations (rightfully) don’t fund us because we’re not creating art directly. Most media foundations won’t fund us because they don’t see music as part of a larger quilt of communications and culturally significant media. There’s a lot of funding for open technology, but it’s primarily focused on science, academia, and feeding back into technology. We’re often told we’re intriguing or doing interesting work, but outside of those traditional funding areas.
Our strategy for grants is simple: when we find a forward thinking organization offering a grant that feels like a mission fit, we apply. Otherwise we spend our time elsewhere, working to call attention to the vital role musicians play in our world, hoping to influence what gets funding in the future — for us or anyone working in the open to empower musicians.
Earned Income
This is basically “money from the product you make.” We’re committed to never charging for our services. “Free now and forever” is important to us. We’ll add ways for artists to set up recurring donations or percentage-based donations, but it’s hard to make any projections around those. For CASH, earned income is probably a pretty minor funding category at best.
Donations
In this context, donations basically mean public fundraisers. These aren’t enough to fill a budget, but they bring 
energy
. Over the years we’ve seen donations and crowdfunding support from thousands of people. We feel it, funders see it, and it means everything. We’re committing to some form of annual fundraiser from now on, because we need that energy and support.
Brand Sponsorship
Okay, so brand sponsorship isn’t a “typical source” for nonprofit funding, but it is a source for us. In the past we’ve found sponsors for events. Going forward we’re trying to find partners to help launch new programs or companies willing to sponsor a better future for musicians. I’ve got no problem slapping a coffee logo on our login page or a shoe slogan at the bottom of Watt if it means they’re helping us fight for musicians.
Major Gifts
Here’s the one we’re focusing on. Major gifts means money from high net worth individuals or family foundations. The gift amount might start as small as a thousand dollars, but the real point here is building lasting relationships with people who understand why it’s so important to build support for musicians. We’re not just looking for money, but for lasting connections to people who move us forward.
So how do we get there?
No really. How do we get there?
Connections are hard. Real and genuine relationships are even harder, but that’s what we need. The goal is to reach as many people as we can who will understand the impact music has on our world, who will understand the power of what CASH Music is offering, and most importantly—people who can help with funding or new connections.
We aren’t selling CASH. We’re adding people to the fold. We’re showing our passion, talking intelligently about impact, showing our vision, and building an emotional bond. It has to be real. There are no shortcuts.
To that end, here’s how we’re going to find those people.
Introductions from friends
File under “all you have to do is ask.” Well I’m asking. I’ve been sitting down to lunch with contacts and friends, brainstorming about who else we should be talking to. If you’re reading this maybe you have an idea who we should be talking to. Introduce us! My email is 
jesse@cashmusic.org
.
Networking dinners
There’s a dinner format called a 
Jeffersonian Dinner
. It’s a format we’ll (mostly) use to find new allies. The short version is that it’s a single-narrative conversation with no more than 10–12 people sharing a meal. It is distinctly not a fundraising event. The format is designed to pull a group together around a theme, and we’ll use it to get closer to new people. Fundraising sucks, networking sucks only a little bit less, but a nice dinner doesn’t suck at all.
Fundraising events
These are the kinds of events you see on TV when so-and-so says “I need to go to that fundraiser tonight.” Except we don’t have gala-level money, so we’re throwing more intimate events for targeted donors. We’re still working out format but the idea is to give donors a wonderful night, say a few words about the work we do and pitch for donations, and create an atmosphere where everyone goes home happy.
Family Foundations
There are thousands of family foundations in America alone. Generally, a family foundation controls a trust set up to give to causes that a specific individual or family cares about. The gifts are smaller than the massive grants that make headlines, but family foundations can be powerful and loyal allies. They’re also not bound by the same regulations as larger foundations, meaning they can be incredibly forward thinking without having to worry about long approval cycles, a board, or tedious metrics.
Our local library has access to a service called Foundation Directory Online. We experimented with search queries, got some volunteer help and spent time in the Multnomah County Library’s computer room building a long list of small family foundations to reach out to. After some more volunteer time that list has been sorted, ranked, commented, and now the fun starts.
Many family foundations don’t have websites or email. Some list a phone number. All of them have a mailing address, so I’m writing letters.
My boilerplate CASH Music introduction letter
I wrote a 
boilerplate letter
 and I’ll be tweaking it for every foundation. I’ll spend time trying to learn a little about each foundation so the person on the other end understands I respect their time. I’m going to be sending them out and following up on each letter two weeks later. It’s a slow and manual process, but it’s real, genuine, and I think it’ll help us find our people one at a time —just like we always have.
And what about the ask?
I always hated asking for money when CASH Music was first starting. It was mostly me and I felt selfish. Eight and a half years later, things are different. There are artists depending on our work, there’s a staff and people and an organization depending on funding. Asking for money is part of my job and I’ll do it with pride, knowing that every ask means we’re that much closer to taking another step towards a better future for musicians.
A specific technique? No I don’t have one. Formulas and plans can only take you so far. At the end of the day I see fundraising as connecting to people. Every relationship, every ask, will be different. The one constant is this:
I care deeply about our mission. I believe that musicians shape the world around us and play a vital role in our world. What they do takes courage, creativity, skill, and time. It takes labor. I believe musicians deserve more than the world gives them. I know that open tools directly in the hands of artists means musicians are more empowered, more capable, and more willing to build better careers for themselves.
I’ll fight for that, and make sure every potential donor knows it.