Why Do We All Hate Fundraising?
Fundraising is my demon. I hate it. I’ve been trying to unpack why. And if it has to feel so terrible.
As I’ve 
written about extensively
, we are on a warpath to profitability at Twenty20 and are on track to be there by the end of this year. While we have a couple million in the bank, and should have enough cash to get there, our board has encouraged me to look at doing a small round this quarter to provide us a little breathing room and help us invest more aggressively in a few growth channels that are working nicely for us.
Ugh. They’re probably right. 
But I fucking hate fundraising.
I’m not even that terrible at it. At 
Twenty20
, we’ve raised $12.2M from some of the world’s best investors. I know 
how 
to do it.
 
I just 
hate
 it.
I’ve been trying to unpack 
why
 I hate it.
Where’s the fear come from?
Fundraising brings up a huge amount of anxiety and fear for me. A disproportionate amount given the trajectory of the business and our previous success at bringing in capital. I find myself worrying about it for months in advance.
I used to massively over prepare, spending weeks building my deck and then carefully rehearsing the pitch and every answer to every question I imaged the investors might ask. I’ve dropped most of that. Five years in, I’m at ease talking about our business, our mission, our market. But the anxiety remains around fundraising.
I’ve been thinking about what the triggers might be. Two come to mind:
I really struggle in situations where I feel I don’t ‘belong.’
I carry inside me a deep-seeded worry that my best won’t be good enough.
I think these are common traits among entrepreneurs.
I think fundraising hits on both of these. Hard.
I think that leaves a lot of entrepreneurs struggling silently with these emotions as they face fundraising processes.
So…I think I’ll write about it.
Belonging
Belonging is a weird one but an issue that’s been with me since my early grade school days. I felt like an outsider for most of those years. Never one of the cool kids and routinely picked last on the playground for all sports. Those painful feelings have come up again at various periods throughout my adolescence and adulthood.
As a startup founder, I’ve often had a hard time feeling like I really belong in the startup community (if it can really be called that?). The other ‘kids’ seem cooler — and always seem to have it all figured out. Of course, a few years into this, I know they don’t. Nobody does. I’ve gotten to know many of the people well whom I used to just read about in the press; turns out we’re all facing down our own demons.
People don’t usually do crazy things like start companies if they aren’t overcompensating for some inner insecurity.
But when you’re just getting started, it seems everyone knows better than you and has it all figured out out.
I think fundraising brings all that up for me. It’s one major, binary judgment on whether I belong in this ecosystem. Do I make the cut?
Am I good enough?
If school left me with a feeling I wasn’t cool enough to belong, my relationship with my father at home left me with a strong feeling my best performance would never be quite enough.
It wasn’t his fault per se. He’d grown up in a home where his father never hugged him, never attended one of his football games, and never told him he was proud of him. My dad simply lacked the emotional language for conveying approval in the way I needed to receive it.
This left me with a chip on my shoulder. That chip has driven me to do many of the great things I’ve done in my life. Including starting a company. But that chips weighs me down heavily when it comes to fundraising — something that’s at times necessary to the survival of that very company.
Fundraising is this weird experience of looking for outside validation on the project you’ve been working on for years. As founders, we don’t get much other validation. Especially in the early days when there aren’t growing customer or revenue graphs to obsess about. If you were trained, like me, by your experience in school that if you work hard and hand in your project on time, your teacher will give you a big fat ‘A,’ grinding on a company for months (or years) with little external validation can be tough. It’s easy to make fundraising the long awaited respite from that lack of validation, but that’s a dangerous road.
This isn’t that.
I’ve frequently made fundraising into a search for acceptance and validation. Even now, having done this for years and taken over a hundred investor meetings, I struggle to remember this isn’t that.
Fundraising isn’t about searching for acceptance or validation from some venture capitalist sitting at the end of a way-too-massive conference table on Sand Hill Road.
Why are they always so big? Photo, 
Twenty20
.
Fundraising is about two things:
Sourcing capital. In this way, fundraising is a sales process.
Finding a partner. In this way, fundraising is a bit like dating.
Capital
The capital raising part has little to do with whether the VC likes you, or you like her, or even how carefully you craft and deliver your perfect pitch. It’s a sales process. Each of the forty investors you’re planning to meet are in the market for a slightly different range of products. Your business may be in that range for many, or some, or none. Your job is to give a ‘good enough’ overview of your business so they can determine if you’re in range.
But don’t get it wrong- it is a sales process. That means a whole bunch of leads in the top of the funnel and a ton of fallout along the way. And you only need one.
Partnership
When I first started fundraising for 
Twenty20
, I thought about this, the most important part of fundraising, precisely zero. I’m fortunate; along the way some smart advisors got me to snap out of it. When you take money from someone, particularly when they join your board, you’re entering into a marriage of sorts. If you do this part right, you’re inviting someone not just to invest but to partner with you. I spent a couple early years thinking of my investors as my bosses. Each month, I’d write them an update on my performance — how the business was doing. When things went wrong, I’d hunt down solutions so I could convince them I was staying ahead of any downside risk.
We’ve moved away from that way of doing business. We now bring our real questions and challenges to our board and our other investors. When we don’t know the answer to a major question, 
like a year ago when our inside sales effort went from super profitable to burning half a million a month
, we even went so far as to lock our entire board and advisors in the same house in LA for a day. We wrestled 
together
 through the hardest questions we’d ever faced. The result was an incredible plan that had major buy-in…and that saved the business.
To operate that way, your investors need to be partners. If you’re looking for partners, then what you think about the fit during your pitch meetings is just as important as what that prospective VC thinks. You’re looking for someone with whom you want to spend your best days and your darkest days over the next 5–10 years.
Is there any freedom?
Of course, like most journeys of self-discovery in this life, realizing the source of the pain is only the beginning. But it is an important step. For me, realizing the anxiety and fear go back much further than my role as a startup CEO…this brings some relief for me. It’s allowed me to begin to separate the event (i.e. a pass from an investor) from the resulting emotion (shame, fear, self-doubt). Those emotions still come up, but increasingly I’m able to see them for what they are — a natural and fleeting response to a brief, non-personal experience of rejection. As a result, while each of those passes feel shitty, they feel shitty for a much briefer period. I’m able to move on more quickly to the next meeting. Or to dinner with friends.
Care for thyself
I’ve also found it helpful to beaf up my support system and supporting habits. During fundraising trips to SF, I’m careful to block time each morning to hit the gym. I also take care to schedule dinners with close friends each evening. Exercise and conversations with close friends are coping mechanisms that help me quickly reset and show up ready the next day.
Remembering the human on the other side
It’s also been liberating for me to get to really know some venture capitalists as humans. I didn’t know any VC’s when I started my company. They were somewhat of an enigma to me. I knew I needed their money to build what I wanted to build. I had a vague idea how their funds worked. But I didn’t know what made them tick.
It’s been eye-opening to get to really know some investors. To realize they also are flesh and blood. In my first few years as a venture-backed CEO, I assumed I was the only one walking into the room with anxiety and stress. That’s just not true.
I could fill another post or podcast on the hard realities of being a VC, but suffice to say for now they are human, they carry human realities around with them, and their jobs are often filled with as much fear, competition, and uncertainty as ours as operators. (Reboot has a 
great podcast with Bijan Sabet
 on this topic.)
I find this thought reassuring. These meetings aren’t about power struggle. They aren’t about me proving to someone else that I’m worthy or my business is valuable. And they aren’t about the investor proving to me she’s worthy or that her firm is magically differentiated and strangely founder friendly. Yes, those things may happen along the way, but at it’s heart, this isn’t that.
Doing it my way
Crossing the chasm… Photo, 
Twenty20
.
Fundraising done right, or at least done the way I need to do it to stay sane, is about exploring partnership. It’s about meeting a bunch of humans, many for the first time, and seeing where the conversations strike a spark. It’s about two people exploring the future that might be and having an honest conversation about whether we might want to shape that future together. Through the many ups and downs along the way.
If you’re in the midst of your own battle with funding, I’m wishing you peace on that journey of exploration. And may the dollars flow easily along the way.
Matt Munson is the CEO of 
Twenty20
. He is the managing editor of the 
Getting Real
 blog and the upcoming Getting Real podcast. 
Subscribe to get updates on Matt’s articles and podcasts in inbox.