Only the brave make history. On fundraising and getting what you want.

I’ve now been on both sides of the table many times.
I’ve met with thousands of founders and have invested in over 40 teams.
And I’ve gone out and met with hundreds of investors to raise money for a few different ventures.
My main conclusion is that only the brave are remembered. That is valid for both sides.
There is no measure for the extent to which entrepreneurs will be grateful to those who first took a chance on them, who helped them when they most needed it and were at their weakest.
When you are interacting with a founder as an investor, realize that you may be privileged to be living one of the defining points of their lives.
It is your decision what role you play — whether you will be the inflection point, or wait until someone else changes that person’s history instead of you.
You will see a lot of things not worth investing in for many reasons. You should pass on them respectfully.
But you will also notice sparks of greatness, if you pay attention.
And I think a lot of investors see those, not only the greats.
But the difference is that the greats trust the little things they pick up on and are confident enough to make decisions based off of them. They will jump in without caring who jumps in after them.
The others have it right there in their faces, the little signs that are whispering to them, but they either don’t notice or have forgotten to notice because they are drowned in the much louder buzz of social proof.
It’s easy to invest once Sequoia or Benchmark are in. Well actually it isn’t. It becomes very hard to get in because now everyone comes running back, knocking furiously at the door. And that’s how it should be.
As a founder, why would you now want to work with those people who couldn’t make up their own minds if you now have access to everyone? What value do they bring?
I am not in a position to give advice to anyone, but here is what I wish for myself.
As an investor, I want to become more courageous every day and make decisions for the reasons that I started investing in the first place. I want to let my intuition lead me.
The only reason I invest is that I’ve always believed that I’m particularly lucky to have exceptional people all around me and am naturally drawn to people with lots of energy and ambition. I want to work with them. I want to help them create and help make all of their wildest hopes and dreams come true.
I don’t care who else sees what I see. They’ll see it eventually.
I want to fall in love and come to my own conclusions. There is no need for an investor who copies someone else’s process.
That’s how I want to be great at my work.
As an entrepreneur, I want to be ever aware that it only takes one free thinker to make it all happen. It does not matter that most people will only follow. You don’t want to work with most people anyway.
This helps you fight through the deluge of rejection you will face if you are reaching out and asking for things actively enough.
No, you should not be oblivious to feedback.
You should observe yourself from the outside, as the omniscient narrator of your own life, and decide whether you actually believe in what you are presenting, whether you are threatened and made defensive by rejection or just further fueled to prove to the world that what you have in mind needs to and will exist.
You should be getting rejected a lot. That shows that you are at the fringe of what is possible and impossible to you. If things are too easy you should be leveling up and finding the next challenge to plough through.
You will meet many sheep. The sheep will try to waste your time because they are indecisive. You will become better at spotting them with their thinly-veiled concerned questions, vague enthusiasm, postponed, contingent deliberations and 1001 other artful ways of stalling.
Learn to ignore them. They will not matter.
Keep casting a wide net.
Remember: all you need is to find one free thinker.
One person to open up the floodgates for you.
Everyone would publish JK Rowling today.
But how many times was she ignored?
What did one publisher see that all the others so casually overlooked?
It’s not hard to invest when all the information is out there. The problem with “venture” capital is that there’s too much capital and too little venture.
The difficult, fun, terrifying, beautiful part of the job is where the opportunity to be great is.
And that is to discover treasures before anyone else.
I certainly know how grateful entrepreneurs are when people are the first to take a chance on them. I’ve experienced it and it hits you right in the heart.
You know that it’s one of the highlights of the reel of your life, something that you will remember over and over for the decades to come as your company grows, a story that you’ll tell your kids and maybe even smile about in your last breaths.
The first people who committed to backing me did so saying something like:
“I like you and think you’re really smart and energetic and ambitious and that you’re going to build something great and make it work. What you’re doing might change but I know you will do something interesting, whatever it is. Count me in.”
That is not the type of trust you ever forget.
The investor who hasn’t been a founder doesn’t actually realize how powerful that is.
I’ve been in meetings trying to raise where I’ve stared at the investor and thought — “man, your business is all about finding the next great entrepreneurs and so far you’ve only been rude and cynical and undifferentiated. You really are just money. It’s too bad you didn’t realize that the next huge company was sitting right there in front of you. Too bad for you.”
It’s their loss. I have no desire to work with them.
The founder is never the beggar. Quite to the contrary these days. There are hundreds of new funds being created every year, all trying to crowd into the few great companies.
You, the founder, are the scarce, precious resource.
I don’t convince anyone of anything. I explain what I am going to do, not what I want to do if they fund me. It will happen, with or without them.
I have nothing to prove. I am selecting more than the investors are and am looking for kindred spirits to work on something great with. I am looking for real partners with real opinions.
Don’t think you have to fit in.
Be polarizing.
Repulse, and attract.
*
