List of Best Blogs on Fundraising
As an entrepreneur if you are raising your first money(Seed/Angel), then there are tons of questions that comes to mind and it is very hard to have all the answers in one place.
Having faced this question from entrepreneurs many times, I decided to put together the list of most important people and their writings that can help anyone get a headstart with regards to fundraising and understanding the intricacies involved.
Venturehacks blog
: Naval and Nivi has written extensively about fundraising.You can find all of them here, pay special attention to the angel section: 
http://venturehacks.com/archives
David Rose
: David Rose, the Founder of New York Angels and Gust has probably written answer to every aspect of fundraising from an entrepreneurs and investors perspective,respectively. You can find all of them distributed across Quora,by following him. The better way to read the advice from him is by reading the blog posts here: 
http://blog.gust.com/author/david-s-rose/
Mark Suster
: Mark Suster of Upfront Ventures is one of the most prolific bloggers with tremendous insights on various aspects of building a business and Venture Capital. You can read everything he has written around fundraising by following this link: 
http://www.bothsidesofthetable.com/category/startup-lessons/fundraising/
Fred Wilson
: Fred Wilson who is the Co-Founder of Union Square Ventures, is probably the most consistent blogger in the investing/venture capital world. His notes everyday are on varied topics, if you are looking to pick his brains on fundraising, please follow this link: 
http://avc.com/category/venture-capital-and-technology/
Paul Graham: 
Any discussion around start-ups is not complete without having Paul Graham of Y-Combinator. There are tons of topics on which PG has written, but if you are fundraising, you should not miss out on reading the following in particular:
 
http://www.paulgraham.com/fr.html
Brad Feld
: This is how Brad describes himself on Twitter “I’m a VC at Foundry Group. I live in Boulder, Colorado, invest in software and Internet companies around the US, run marathons, and love to read”. You can read about his thoughts on fundraising here: 
http://www.feld.com/archives/category/venture-capital
Miscellaneous: 
There are scores of people around the world who write on the theme of fundraising. Some of the other blogs you might want to follow but are not specifically around fundraising are 
A16z
 from Andreessen and Horowitz, Satya Patel from 
Homebrew
, 
Jason Calacanis
, 
Sam Altman
 and 
Andrew Chen
. “How to Start a Startup” course by Y Combinator has a 
video
 dedicated on fundraising as well by Marc Andreessen, Ron Conway and Parker Conrad.
I am very hopeful that this list will be helpful to anyone trying to raise money for the first time. Is there anything you would like to add? Please mention in the comments and I would be happy to include it here :)