The Fundraising Deck We Used to Raise Our Angel Round
The first time we’ve ever raised money and the pitch deck we used.
Disclaimer
: 
Our startup 
almost died fundraising
. It was an incredible 3-month distraction that led to a VC backing out.
We did one thing right that ultimately saved us from death. Instead of focusing on investors, we put all of our focus back on delivering value to our customers. Once we made that decision, we closed the round in 4 days and raised a total of $182K.
We created a real business — funding or no funding, we’re in it for the long haul. Keep track of our progress with our 
public revenue dashboard
. I want to turn this into a Q&A and help any founders who are thinking about raising money.
Do you have any questions about the deck or fundraising?
I’ll update this post as the questions come in! Please email/tweet/DM/etc. with your questions and I’ll reply here to share the knowledge with everyone.
Q: With the thousands of social media tools, companies and agencies out there (as pointed out in your competitive landscape slide), didn’t investors think this was a crowded market?
A: Yes, that was a concern. The options today for small and medium sized businesses aren’t great. They go to an expensive agency, hire a social media intern that doesn’t know anything about marketing or owners spend 2–3 hours every single day on all social platforms.
Q: How did you get to your first yes from an investor?
A: It wasn’t easy. They were our mentor for a year, supported us since the beginning and saw all the rubbish we went through. We had real revenue coming in and fast. Up until that point, every single investor we talked to said they want to see how the product turns out in the next few months.
Q: How long did the fundraising process take?
A: We had money soft-committed within 2 weeks. That was the easy part. The hard part was trying to get it closed. It dragged on for 3 months due to my inexperience in fundraising. I’ve learned from experienced founders that it’s up you to guide the entire timeline, process, etc.
Q: Did only one founder focus on fundraising and the other on the business?
A: Karl and I both pitched investors together. And then we both worked on the business at night. However, experienced founders suggest that only one person focus on fundraising.
Q: How do I know if I have enough traction to raise money?
A: Any resemblance of growth and that things are working is good enough. It’s about finding the right investors who believe in you, the market and the product. Start with the facts and real numbers even if they are small.
I once pitched 
@TuckerMax
 and led off with our 10% weekly growth rate. I must have set the expectations high because when he asked what our MRR was, I told him $1,700 and he laughed =)
Q: Can you introduce me to any investors?
A: Please do the hard work for me =) Find the investors you want to meet, see if I know them through LinkedIn, and send me a forwardable email. Alex Iskold wrote a great 
step by step guide
 on how to ask for an intro.
Q: What’s the shortcut for raising money?
A: There are no shortcuts. It requires a ton of work. Spreadsheets, emails, meetings, followups, financial projections, etc. It’s a grind.Have questions or comments?
Tweet me 
@sherm8n
 or email me 
sherman at goodaudience
. Let me know how I can be helpful ☺
Totally transparent startup advice daily.
Join 4,364 other entrepreneurs who get our content first: 
http://eepurl.com/V8SyT
Please click “Recommend” to get this post in front of more people!