How To Know When Your Startup Is Ready For Fundraising
Recently, an entrepreneur told me investors withdrew from investing in his tech startup. He looked upset and confused as to why he, after five months, hasn’t been able to raise any funding from VC’s or angels. I replied, “You’re not ready yet.” This first-time founder just couldn’t understand why no VC’s wanted to invest in his pre-product company.
The days are gone when entrepreneurs could wield investors to power their startups before proving a sound business model. Today, investors hold all the power. In fact, 
funding has dropped 11 percent to $12 billion in the first quarter from a year earlier
. The process is longer, valuations are lower and investors have more time for due diligence (which I believe is a good thing). In short, there are two simple reasons why you’re not achieving maximum productivity with fundraising.
1) 
You fail to answer the necessary questions.
You might not know to the degree of what you have to do, but people are making a conscious decision to bet on you. Make sure to know your market and you’re able to answer the following questions:
Are you solving a real problem for a specific customer?
Do you have product-market fit?
What is your business model?
What barriers are preventing you to enter a particular market?
Who are your competitors?
What are the riskiest parts of your plan?
What is your target raise?
How will you efficiently deploy the investment?
What if you can’t raise at all?
A true sign that you are not ready to fundraise is your inability to describe what your startup does. You’ll be closer to successfully fundraising after you answer these questions (and many more). After you nail these down, only then is it time to consider fundraising.
2)
 You don’t understand the game.
It’s much easier than you think to burn bridges in venture. Emailing every single investor on the planet won’t do you any good and will be a sure way to have you blacklisted. Investors talk to each other, regularly sharing deal flow. Instead of casting a wide net, tap into your inner-network. Everyone has a network — and if you don’t, think seriously about the one you need to build in order to build a business.
Don’t talk to a VC until you have product and traction.
The first source of capital you should approach are your friends and family. This is anyone who would support you for no other reason than that they love you. Raising a friends and family round at the very least validates that someone believes in you and your startup. Most investors won’t consider you unless they see you and/or your family has skin in the game. If you can’t convince your brother, then how will you be able to get a stranger to invest.
Once you have raised a friends and family, have serious traction and optimized growth, then it’s time to start developing relationships with investors. Research and scour investors who play in your space. Look for the operators who once stood in your very shoes. Contact them directly or through an introduction from an industry peer. Warm introductions always work best and referrals are more likely to be considered than a cold email.
Understand the startups they are looking to invest in. For instance, the typical criteria for investing in SAAS startups are:
Focus is on software, will take hardware meetings but mostly for the related software
Revenue generating already, prefer 3+ months. (Except for major break-through products or innovation that take R&D)
They can be pre-revenue but shipping soon
30% MoM growth
B2B focus, will meet with others, but primarily B2B
Fundraising can be a painful process so don’t be scared to seek advice. Answer the questions and assess the venture landscape. Find your 
champion 
— The person you’ve had previous conversations with and truly excited about what you’re doing. If you don’t, then you’ll only be doing a disservice to your startup and your own reputation.