So, I’ve Reached My “Diversity Chat” Limit
Months ago, I said that I would never speak at an edtech conference on diversity again. It’s literally one of those topics where you are either preaching to a choir or to a brick wall. There is rarely an “in-between” other than those cases when in 2017, people are still being challenged to think beyond their chosen bubbles 
for the first time
. The latter is every Maxine Waters meme staring into your soul at once.
I’m all for people discovering their privilege and having conversations about that privilege but I cannot and will not engage in non-productive chat leading to zero action.
I cannot be a cheerleader for the non-oppressed finding their privilege for the first time. It’s so comical at this point that I liken it to watching Archimedes in a never-ending loop of displacement discovering baths…months and years of baths…except we aren’t in the loop and get to watch this discovery happen over & over again. ( I taught math…deal!)
I’m in a ton of “diversity” Facebook groups and if I have learned nothing else in the past few months, I’ve learned that there is great struggle in progressing from chat to action. It’s like there’s a space on the ladder where a step should be. Instead of finding a way to fill the gap and move forward, people just pause at the space…and discuss the space.
We’re basically married to the space at this point.
It sure would be nice if we did more than talk about how hard diversity is and maybe started changing the practices that keep us here. We could start with recognizing that people who look like me also do some pretty amazing work and learning from different perspectives is kind of a human thing to do…naturally.
Also, quit expecting us to prove ourselves. We’ve done that.
It would be amazing if when people walked into a room with zero people of color, that they questioned the validity of the room before posting images online proudly displaying their super non-diverse space.
My gosh, I would even settle for people realizing that they are in a super non-diverse space. Why is this so hard to do and call out??? Why???
I dream of the day when people stop feeling the need to question if the one person of color on the panel or program was chosen by quota or qualification.
I take that back. I dream of the day when we’re not seeing only one person of color speaking in any capacity and especially not the same one over and over. (
I say this as someone who has been questioned for allowing myself to be 
this 
person and frankly, perhaps this is a thought that maybe we should visit…even though I am beyond qualified. To be clear, I always know my qualifications but I am also not blind to being the only one.
)
I do believe that people who struggle to understand why they need to see beyond their biases need a space to talk but I also wholeheartedly think that this space does not need to include me.
…because if I said what I really wanted to say at these “oh my gosh, racism is real” moments and especially when articles are posted by super non-authentic people who’ve just discovered the “diversity bandwagon”…
I would be no different than those who just keep chatting about all of the diversity things. My frustration with being inadvertently placed in the position of being the “unofficial people of color whisperer” would be just as non-productive as all of the climbing up the ladder and stopping at the gap in the steps.
…discussing the problem and never moving forward.
We all have our limits.