Managers, why do you put up with Jerks?
In Ben Horowitz’s book, “The Hard Thing About Hard Things”, he says while you should generally not tolerate assholes, you can decide to put up with a jerk because that jerk is amazingly productive and brilliant. But you have to be clear about why you’re doing it, do it consciously, and you can only allow one jerk in any given area. Also if the jerk stops performing then you let them go. I can see that. Exceptions, with clear boundaries.
I think managers tolerate jerks to avoid hard conversations and so they can believe they’re good people. It’s hard to fire someone. I think if you’re a good person, it will always hurt at some level when you fire someone. You think about their self confidence. You think about their family. You think about how you relate to them and how they may have made some mistakes and some bad choices — but so have you — and they’re really a good person deep down. If you don’t fire them, you allow everyone to suffer a little bit (until they quit). But for the most part, no one suffers a lot. I get it. I’ve been there.
In my opinion, the one compelling argument to fire jerks is economic. Jerks are expensive! You know what they say about developers? (I think this applies to other professions as well, but I’ve only ever worked in the one.) They say that developers 
want
 to do the right thing. You just have to get out of their way. Well, jerks get in their way in all sorts of ways, daily. They sow discontent. They spread cynicism, a disease which once caught is hard to cure. They spread fear, distrust, mutiny, and kill your safe spaces, which research and experience have shown us kills productivity, collaboration, and creativity. Teamwork is dead, motivation is dead, faith in management is dead, and eventually either you end up with apathetic sheep or people leave.
And why don’t more people complain about the jerks? The same reason you don’t fire the jerks: you don’t actually, in practice, give a shit about people. About the every day safety and happiness of people that you have full control over. You don’t listen, you don’t see, you don’t think. And people know it. So they can choose to survive by not listening, not seeing, not thinking, or they can go crazy seeing a team they love dissolve for no good reason. If they don’t succumb to apathy to save their health, they’ll leave. Those fighters are exactly the people you 
don’t 
want to leave your company.
That’s why, as a wise manager once told me, good managers “take infinite pains” and their first assumption is always that problems are caused by managerial error. As they say, people join companies and leave managers. You may not be the jerk, but you tolerated the jerk when you could have done something.