If I Was The Boss: There Would Be Frequent Performance Reviews
Welcome to my first edition of 
If I Was The Boss
, this is a series where I will ponder how we can make the workplace a better place to work. In this first edition I am going to discuss increasing the frequency of performance reviews and some of the added benefits we 
could
 see.Performance reviews suck
, mostly because they happen too infrequently and cover too many data points. At a previous company we had annual performance reviews which took place in October. During this month the managers would all meet to discuss various things about their direct-reports and determine how they would rank and assign various numbers to how they have done. Then this information would be submitted and in the middle of February you would find out what your score was and what your salary increase would be (effective in March). This seems fairly typical for larger traditional companies, so it’s no wonder why people hate performance reviews.
So if I was the boss, my company would have monthly performance reviews. The goal of this is to decrease the data points so that they are easier to understand and act on as well as increase the amount of the feedback between the managers and their direct-reports. Frequent performance reviews will hurt productivity though! Whoa hold on, I have a hypothetical process for that.
Let’s imagine Stephanie is a manager and her direct-reports are Jeremy, Amanda, and Cody. The week before Cody’s performance review an email would go out to Jeremy and Amanda to fill out a form about Cody. It would ask them to rate Cody’s performance based on the current goals of the organization, it would also ask what Cody excels at and what he could improve. Ideally this form should take five to ten minutes to fill out. Then in the performance review Stephanie would go over what his peers filled out as well as let him know what he is doing well and figure out how he can improve upon in other areas. The performance would be broken down into three categories: Needs Improvement, Meets Expectations, Exceeds Expectations. The first one would result in no change in salary, the other two (meets or exceeds expectations) would result in some modest change in salary. Okay, maybe I should elaborate on that a bit further.
I like to think that employees are always improving their skill-set which is constantly making them more valuable. So through frequent performance reviews you open up the ability for frequent pay increases, let’s say 0.25% for meeting expectations and 0.50% for exceeding them. This essentially breaks up the pay increase over the entire year instead of making the employee wait an entire year to find out what their new value is to the company. Okay, enough talking about salary though, I can probably write an entire article about that; back to why frequent performance reviews could be awesome.
Let’s say that Cody is doing an amazing job with writing easy to maintain code, it’d probably be good for him to hear about that early on to give him a boost of confidence. Let’s also say that Cody uses too many emojis in the Slack channel and ends up being a little distracting, wouldn’t it be great if he could find out about that after one month instead of waiting six or twelve months? It all comes back to increasing the frequency of the feedback loop. It would be far easier to improve on a few small things month by month than to figure out how to improve on several big things every year.
You’re also teaching your employees how to evaluate each other, and since they are doing this twelve times a year instead of once or twice, they’ll probably become fairly good at it. Since they are doing these reviews frequently they will undoubtedly learn how to become more efficient with filling them out as well as responding to the feedback.
That’s pretty much it. I think performance reviews happen far too infrequently at most companies to be truly effective. If I was the boss, we would have very frequent performance reviews to focus on small bits of feedback.Thankfully, I’m not the boss.