Performance Improvement Plan
Use a Performance Improvement Plan when you have identified a performance problem and are looking for ways to improve the performance of an employee. The Performance Improvement Plan plays an integral role in correcting performance discrepancies. It is a tool to monitor and measure the deficient work products, processes and/or behaviors of a particular employee in an effort to improve performance or modify behavior.
Key items to remember
Define the problem. This is the deficiency statement. Determine if the problem is a performance problem (employee has not been able to demonstrate mastery of skills/tasks) or a behavior problem (employee may perform the tasks but creates an environment that disrupts the workplace).
Define the duties or behaviors where improvement is required.
What are the aspects of performance required to successfully perform these duties?
Which skills need improvement?
What changes need to be made in application of skills an employee has already demonstrated.
What behaviors need modified?
Establish the priorities of the duties.
What are the possible consequences of errors associated with these duties?
How frequently are these duties performed?
How do they relate when compared with other duties?
Identify the standards upon which performance will be measured for each of the duties identified.
Are they reasonable?
Are they attainable?
Establish short-range and long-range goals and timetables for accomplishing change in performance/behavior with employee.
Are they reasonable?
Are they attainable?
Develop an action plan.
What will the manager do to help the employee accomplish the goals within the desired time frame?
What will the employee do to facilitate improvement of the product or process?
Are the items reasonable?
Can the items be accomplished?
Are the items flexible?
Establish periodic review dates.
Are the employee and the manager both aware of what will be reviewed at each of these meetings?
Measure actual performance against the standards to determine if expectations were:
Establish a Performance Improvement Plan file for the employee.
Does the file contain documentation which identifies both improvements and/or continued deficiencies?
Is the employee encouraged to review this file periodically?
Put the Performance Improvement Plan in writing.
Has plain and simple language been used?
Have specific references been used to identify areas of deficiency?
Have specific examples been used in periodic reviews which clearly identify accomplishments or continuing deficiencies?
Have you chosen an easy-to-read format such as a table or a duty by duty listing?
Have the Terms of Agreement been included in the Performance Improvement Plan?
Remember, work performance should never be a mystery! 
Performance Improvement Plan Samples
 Examples of Performance Improvement Plans are available for these performance discrepancies:How to Improve Your Memory?
➜Continue readingExample 1: Employee fails to complete tasks in order of their priority.
Example 2: Employee fails to maintain good interpersonal working relationships with other staff members, including supervisor.Originally published at www.indiana.edu.