Feedback By Tech and Face-To-Face 3
PwC’s survey shows that more than 60% of employees would like to receive feedback permanently: each day or each week. Many of them think that feedback is helpful but only up to 30% said they get feedback.
Take advantage of tech tools
Such companies as MGM Resorts International, Dutch international bank ING, Booking.com shift from traditional performance feedback to the web- and mobile-based technologies that may provide real-time checking. They share their experiences that feedback apps improve productivity and equip staff with appropriate knowledge where and how to move on. For instance, former CEO Jack Welch has used feedback app PD@GE that helps 300,000 employees from different countries to gain better vision on their performance 24 hours a day.
Tech tools help to deliver feedback faster and adapt it to the busy schedule. For example, Halogen’s feedback app simplifies feedback process and makes both employees and managers comfortable to give and receive a performance review. It allows adding useful content when sending feedback to a peer, applying notifications when feedback has been gotten. The app helps to provide peer feedback as well.
There are many different apps for employee feedback: TinyPulse, Culture Amp, Friday Feedback, Trakstar and so on. They support reviewing the goals, deliver meaningful analytics, improve engagement, especially for young generation. In general, new technology such as artificial intelligence in recruitment helps to automate recommendations to upgrade a purpose, guidance to move forward in employee’s development plan, reminders to deliver peer feedback.
Emphasize employee’s strengths
When employees get feedback on their achievements, they show greater profitability. For example, Gallup helps their staff to know their strengths to improve the performance. They provided study and found that employees who get positive feedback quit a job rarely.
Research shows that 80% of employees grow more from refining what they are doing right. Expanding your staff’ strengths needs to be a process that involves face-to-face discussions and informal feedback. Interact with all your team members to help their strong sides shine, and equip them with the resources to improve their skills on a daily basis.
You may try automated test creation 
https://itsquiz.ai
 
to identify key achievements of employees. This is a helpful tool in corporate education that allows measuring results without manual work. Progress motivates to reach greater results.
Focus on your nonverbal cues
Employees notice signs of trust and their brains react more positively to empathic leaders. Positive interaction at work may even decrease health care costs because positive workplace communicating refines your immune system and prevents different biases. Researchers found that bosses impact their employee’s well-being more than other persons. That’s why many talents look for supportive relationships.
Managers need to smile and create a positive atmosphere and create a feeling of connection by eye contact. Also, the tone of our voice leads how we feel. The study emphasizes that we may often forecast someone’s emotions from their voice.
Recognize employee’s efforts
Recognition is important for a highly-engaged staff and helps to build better relationships. Employee recognition is a valuable tool that strengthens business results.
When you appreciate people effectively, you encourage them to repeat the same behavior. Your recognition creates a clear vision of how you would like them to perform. It is important because many workers want to be effective contributors, and it helps to grow their self-worth.
Tech tools help to deliver feedback faster and adapt it to the busy schedule.
 For example, Halogen’s feedback app simplifies feedback process and makes both employees and managers comfortable to give and receive a performance review. It allows adding useful content when sending feedback to a peer, applying notifications when feedback has been gotten. The app helps to provide peer feedback as well.
Such companies as MGM Resorts International, Dutch international bank ING, Booking.com shift from traditional performance feedback to the web- and mobile-based technologies that may provide real-time checking. They share their experiences that feedback apps improve productivity and equip staff with appropriate knowledge where and how to move on. For instance, former CEO Jack Welch has used feedback app PD@GE that helps 300,000 employees from different countries to gain better vision on their performance 24 hours a day.
Research shows that 80% of employees grow more from refining what they are doing right. Expanding your staff’ strengths needs to be a process that involves face-to-face discussions and informal feedback. Interact with all your team members to help their strong sides shine, and equip them with the resources to improve their skills on a daily basis.
©
Itsquiz
 — 
Be competent!