Why The Future of Performance Reviews Demands Change NowPerformance reviews are getting the sack the world over. Measuring employee performance is still critical to the success of any business, but it’s how this performance is measured that is changing.
Corporate giants including GE, Microsoft, Dell and Deloitte, have all but
 killed off the frustrating and sometimes even toxic annual performance review
. Looking, closer to home, 
big banks like NAB
 are also now changing their ways. These companies are following in the footsteps of others like Adobe, 
who back in 2012 axed annual performance reviews
 in favour of more constructive and positive feedback methods.
These industry heavyweights, along with many other companies have stopped rating their employers on a clinical scale of 1–10 and are instead now favouring regular, often weekly or bi-monthly goal-oriented check-ins.
Why are companies revamping their overall employee performance rating model? Why are they no longer grading their employees and ranking them on a scale of the best performers all they way down to the worst? Well,
 as GE’s head of human resources explained to Quartz
:
“You know that humans don’t really like to give negative feedback. … So if you want the person that’s working for you to improve, you have to think about it in true coaching terms.”
Susan Peters — SVP Human Resources GE
The problem with annual performance reviews
Annual performance reviews can revive old high school anxieties like no other. But it’s not just the uncomfortable feeling of being judged and rated that’s the problem.
Annual performance reviews have clearly become a lose-lose situation on both sides of the equation: employees fear them and managers hate them. When 
Deloitte reviewed their own annual review system
 they found that an average of 28 hours was spent per employee per review.
What is meant to be a system that promotes efficiency and improved business performance has now not only become the most dreaded time of the employee’s year, it’s also become an incredible waste of company resources.
The biggest problem of all lies hidden in plain sight. Annual performance reviews are just that, they’re reviews. They review how an employee has performed in the past and are used to reward accordingly. They focus on the past, not on the future.
So instead of focusing on more efficient methods of measuring employee performance once a year and using the benefit of hindsight to reward or punish accordingly, companies are now going straight to the heart of the problem.
The future of employee performance reviews
Looking at successful global companies like IBM and Deloitte who have abolished the old traditional methods of assessing performance, we now see a major shift towards a system that utilises more frequent and direct engagement between employees and management, rather than a standalone clinical assessment.
To remain ahead of the game, companies will be forced to upgrade their assessment methods to foster a healthier company culture that promotes collaboration and regular, constructive and goal-oriented feedback.
So here are the three key things that could completely change the game when it comes to assessing employee performance.
The Three Things That Make Performance Reviews Work
1. HONEST AND CLEAR FEEDBACK
Negative feedback is hard to swallow. Even if your boss is sugarcoating the truth, that chat about your poor performance is likely to be followed by feelings of discouragement.
Negative feedback doesn’t discriminate. Even those perfect employees who are there because they love what they do and for whom their paycheck is a handy bonus can’t escape from those daunting feelings of failure.
So it’s no wonder performance reviews have been tiptoeing around 
negative feedback
 in fear of setting off a bomb of demotivation around the office.
However, between wanting to tell the truth and the fear of hurting someone’s feelings, most performance reviews have now lost that very secret ingredient to their efficiency: honesty.
“The key is accuracy in the ratings managers give their employees”
Dr. Jisoo Ock, I/O Psychologist
A study led by Industrial-Organization psychologist, Dr. Jisoo Ock on 
the psychology of performance evaluation
 in the U.S, found that managers tended to be too generous when providing feedback on their employee’s performance They wanted to avoid discouraging their employees or hurting their feelings.
As nice and that may be, this walking on egg-shells not only defeats the purpose of having a feedback system, it also makes it difficult for employees to address their weak points, and ultimately develop the skills that are essential for the quality of their work.
Dr. Ock explains that companies where employees feel comfortable exchanging and accepting frequent and constructive feedback are primed to be more efficient and productive.
So rather than focusing on using the right metrics, or the most advanced tech tools to measure performance efficiency, companies must start engaging in a two-way, direct and sincere conversation with their employees. This is how they will achieve real results and stay ahead of the competition.
2. CRITICISM THAT ACTUALLY HELPS
Unfair feedback may lure employees down a dark road. Unhelpful criticism will just get them lost.
What really discourages employees is not the negative feedback per se, but the bitter after-taste that follows after feeling like you’ve done something wrong, coupled with the frustration of not knowing how to fix it.
Harsh and unhelpful criticism only demotivates employees. Constructive criticism, on the other hand, ensures continual improvement.
Clearly, yearly performance reviews don’t leave much room for frequent and constructive conversations.
But as more organisations join the growing chorus of companies who are championing these new assessment methods, clear lines of communication are being opened and problem-solving methods are being introduced that make space for feedback that functions more like guidance.
Asking employees open-ended questions, listening to their opinions (and responding to them), and using feedback that guides them in the right direction could be the jumpstart of a healthy workplace culture. But more importantly, it gives employees the opportunity to get better without feeling unappreciated or demotivated by an inquisition.
Performance reviews that use honest and constructive criticism to communicate with employees 
are destined to be efficient
 because they shine a light on the things that employees should be focussing on. This makes the manager’s job of guiding their employees towards success incalculably easier.
“The art of leadership is not to spend your time measuring and evaluating. It’s all about selecting the person. And if you believe you selected the right person, then you give that person the freedom, the authority, the delegation to innovate and to lead with some very simple measure.”
Accenture CEO Pierre Nanterme
3. FREQUENT CHECK-INS
Rome wasn’t built in a day, and neither was a perfectly efficient method of assessing someone’s work performance.
However, this doesn’t mean that it should take 12 months to identify what should be rewarded, or what needs to be fixed.
If clear and constructive communication between management and employees is the key to efficiency and improvement, it’s a no-brainer that companies should be doing this as often as practicably possible.
It’s counterproductive and time wasting to sweep problems under the rug throughout the year, only to pull them all back out 12 months down the track.
For constructive feedback to have an actual impact on an employee’s performance, it must be delivered in a timely fashion. It must occur as soon as problems arise, and solutions must be found as soon as possible. It shouldn’t be postponed for a difficult and unhelpful conversation months later.
Take it from global companies like Deloitte and IBM, who swapped annual paperwork for frequent check-ins where employees and managers maximize their problem-solving skills through the implementation of clear and effective communication systems.
Companies are starting to understand that frequent systems of communication are actually the most effective method of saving time and money in the evaluation process.
Having frequent chats with employees not only establishes more meaningful relationships, but it also calls for a workplace culture that thrives off on-going feedback and teamwork, rather than competition.
So, what’s next?
Companies that fail to adapt to these necessary changes will evidently lose talent and miss the opportunity for their companies to keep growing and innovating. Without making a concerted effort to understand their employee’s performance, they will fail to recognize the actual value of their employee’s work.
“The world isn’t really on an annual cycle anymore for anything.”
Susan Peters, CEO of General Electrics
We might be still years away from waving goodbye to annual performance reviews within every company, but there’s no reason why companies shouldn’t start changing the conversation with its employees today.
Employees need to know where they are going and how they are expected get there, just like managers need to know where and how to help their teams achieving their maximum potential.
So it might not be time to put the paperwork away and stop assessing employees performance altogether, but it’s definitely time to clear our throats and prepare for frequent and meaningful talks in the office.
What do you think about the future of performance assessments? How would you feel about having regular check-ins with your boss on your performance?Originally published at 
blog.irecruitaustralia.com.au
 on April 21, 2016.