Let’s not mix 360 Feedback & Performance Appraisals
Can 360 Feedback replace Performance Appraisals? But one is a development tool & the other is a performance evaluation tool for employees! Objectives are completely different.
There has been a growing sentiment for some time now that Performance Appraisals are rather useless.
Employees feel that these annual form filling rituals are outdated & are irrelevant to their core functional performance issues & challenges.
Rather, everyone is now going gungho about Feedback. Feedback can be real time and ongoing. That’s what employees need as it actually helps them be better.
In a way, 360 Feedback is getting lot of attention as a much more relevant tool than Performance Appraisals. In fact, organizations are looking to replace Appraisals by a customized 360 Feedback program.
But isn’t this going to be like replacing apples by oranges?
Yes, 360 Feedback tool is a very effective development tool but does it have the power to deliver the core objectives of a performance appraisal.
Moreover, there is a perception problem too. Inherently, employees know that performance appraisals are linked to rewards — the annual increment and the bonuses. Will this perception get carried over & how will it then impact the effectiveness of the 360 degree Feedback exercise?
So, let’s take a step back, start from the basics and make sense of this employee evaluation mayhem J
Performance Appraisal
The purpose of performance appraisal is to primarily measure an employee’s progress on pre-set goals.
Work Goals & Achievements
Goals can also be represented as KRAs, Objectives, Measures, etc. Each of these can also be classified with KPIs and metrics indicating how performance will be evaluated.
Such goals have to be clearly known to both the employee & the Manager at the outset of the review period to then ensure a proper mechanism of tracking progress.
In most cases, such goals are rated and an overall appraisal score is assigned.
At times, development inputs are also covered but that’s mostly in companies where they do not have a separate development track for employees.
Again, in most cases, such scores decide the rewards for the employee — promotion, increments and bonuses.
Thus, the core purpose of the performance appraisal exercise is to measure an employee’s achievement in a specific time frame against a set of objectives.
Now, let’s take a look at 360 Feedback.
360 Feedback
360 Feedback is primarily a development tool.
Soft Skills & Human aspects
What it looks at are the skills, behaviors and working styles & habits of employees as they go about doing their day to day jobs. Typically these are the soft “human” aspects of the job that are qualitative in nature. It’s near impossible to set numerical targets.
Examples include listening skills, team work, conflict resolution, etc.
Feedback is sought from colleagues who are directly interfacing with the employee often and thus are in the best position to provide the most current inputs on the parameters being evaluated.
Such feedback can also be extended to the external world & sought from customers, partners and vendors that interact with the employee on a regular basis.
The purpose of 360 Feedback is actually quite noble — to help the employee become better with quality feedback from the immediate working environment.
In contrast to Performance Appraisals, 360 degree feedback is inherently kept anonymous such that the employee does not exactly know who is providing which input.
Thus, the promise of confidentiality improves the quality of response from the responder group.
360 degree feedback provides 3 definitive values to the development process of the company & employee
A balanced measurement opportunity by taking in feedback from the most relevant sources
It speeds up the opportunity for learning as the employee knows the areas that need bucking up.
Since responses are anonymous, measurements are expectedly more precise.
In essence, performance appraisals are more concerned about the end result i.e. the destination. On the other hand, 360 Feedback is about the journey that helps the traveler towards the destination.
So, the core objectives of the tools are very different.
Yes, there is a growing demand for Performance Appraisals to be more development oriented but however it evolves into, companies still will require a tool to measure the employee’s performance and somehow link compensation rewards to these.
If companies look to replace performance appraisals by 360 Feedback, then 360 feedback will no longer remain the clean tool focussed on development that it currently is. Eventually, employees will start believing that such feedbacks are being used to measure performance and dole rewards and then the vicious cycle will start again.
Thus, to summarize, lets look at the top 5 reasons why 360 Feedback should never be used instead of Performance Appraisals
Performance Appraisals review employees achievement of end results for preset goals. 360 Feedback does not concern itself with what the end work objectives of the employee are. It’s about development, development and development.
A key output of 360 Feedback is a self-development plan by the employee. This leads to follow ups and checkins by Managers with further guidance and feedback. Performance Appraisals concern itself with a measurement — how has the employee performed. So, there is no further plan and related follow-ups.
Anonymity is at the core of the 360 Feedback such that the responder can provide honest inputs with the objective of helping the employee. Performance Appraisals cannot be anonymous as the employee knows who the reviewer is and discussions about performance need to happen in the open.
In 360 feedback, there is no context of competition, thus eliminating any bias in responders giving feedback to an employee. There is no prize to be won; only help the employee improve. Performance Appraisals are set in the highest context of competitiveness as employees are vying for survival and a higher share of the pie.
Employees perceive 360 Feedback as a tool for self development and Performance Appraisals as a tool for rewards. One can change names, processes, and measurement tactics; do whatever — employees will always associate the evolved tool with either of the purpose — a) Is this going to help me improve? or b) Is this going to get me my increments?
So, are you planning for a 360 Feedback program? Surely, after this, you won’t try to position it as a replacement for a Performance Appraisal program.
Hope, this was helpful. On a related note, you may also like this article on “
How To Separate Performance Review & Compensation Discussion
”
Tagged as: 
360 Feedback
 
Performance Appraisals
Originally published at 
360fdbk.com