Organize a 360-Degree Meeting (Phase 1)
In most workplaces, people get feedback on their performance neither constructively nor frequently. 360-degree meetings help people to develop their business and interpersonal skills. (They are not designed to function as performance reviews!) In a 360 degree meeting, each participant gets the combined perspective of several peers (including a manager or team leader) on their skills and behaviors.In a 360-degree meeting, each participant gets the combined perspective of several peers (including a manager or team leader) on their skills and behaviors. The suggestion is to do this at least twice per year. This guide explains how you organize such a meeting.
1) Pick the participants
Decide who should participate in the 360-degree meeting. (You may ask the team members themselves to nominate who else should take part.) Make sure they are people who are really working with each other and will have some experiences with each other’s behaviors and contributions.
2) Communicate your intent
Explain to the participants what a 360-degree meeting is, why this type of feedback is necessary, and what people can expect from this practice. Remind them that the feedback will be face-to-face, not anonymous.
3) Agree on a date and time
Set a date and time and make sure the meeting is not squeezed in between other meetings so that people have time to reflect before and after the meeting.
4) Ask people to prepare
Tell all participants to prepare their notes about each of the other participants. They should think of at least two compliments and no more than one suggestion for improvement. All compliments and suggestions should be about people’s behaviors and skills, not about their personalities or mindsets.
Related Guides
Organize a 360-Degree Meeting (Phase 1)
Prepare for a 360-Degree Meeting (Phase 2)
Hold a 360-Degree Meeting (Phase 3)
Evaluate a 360-Degree Meeting (Phase 4)
HEY! 
Join us and become a team navigator
. Create new guides, like this one, for 
Mind Settlers
, the app that will develop an agile mindset with dynamic, evolving practices for coaches, consultants and agile teams, in a playful, feedback-rich environment.
Also See
360-Degrees Dinner
360-Degree Feedback Information
The Complete Guide to Running 360 Reviews