The End of the Annual Performance Review
If I say the words, “Annual Performance Review”, what do you feel? 
I’m guessing that the miniscule level of positive emotions are lost in a sea of negativity!
Let’s face it, the annual review process is primarily a source of dread and fear for employees and managers alike. None of us like to be judged, especially by the person that oversees our daily work, and even more so by our back-stabbing, “do-gooder” peers. The reality is that 360 reviews and stacked rankings are better suited to an episode of Survivor, given the extent to which employees and managers alike try to game the system. 
Why then do firms insist that managers provide formal feedback and rank their directs once per year, following some random industrial psychology blueprint from a bygone era? 
How about having managers deliver informal feedback more regularly; isn’t this the very essence of people management? What ever happened to celebrating team accomplishments which is the marrow of effective team building?
Annual performance reviews take many different forms, but the primary intent of senior leadership is to create a system of rankings and use them to remove power and authority from their people managers. The sentiment conveyed to managers is that, “No matter how happy you are with your team, you have to rank a few people high, a few people low, and most people average.” But what if you already have a highly effective team? Wouldn’t you want to acknowledge that each member is a stellar contributor in his or her own right, and do this on a regular basis?
Another abysmal aspect of the annual review process is that it has become the annual promotion process at many firms. Large corporations are driven by an annual budget process which then translates to the ability, or lack thereof, of managers to promote their most deserving staff members. This creates a never-ending cycle of winners and losers. Going into review season, employees are thinking, “Will I get a good review and get promoted?” Managers are thinking, “Can I get through the review season without losing anyone?”
Creating a link between annual performance ratings and promotions is the prevailing practice in government. I don’t know of any business leader who would view any government agency as having leading personnel practices! If anything, leader’s at large corporations view startup technology firms with the most envy. The typical successful startup has a strong leader with focused and dedicated followers. Pay and promotion issues are handled quickly and decisively. Contributions are highly visible and informal recognition is frequent and emotionally meaningful. No one thinks about performance reviews because it is far more interesting to work hard in bringing new products to market.
Contrast the startup culture with the annual ratings process consisting of numerical or categorical scores, and it is clear that those ratings are utterly dreadful and useless. The process for computing the overall rating is seldom transparent, often arbitrary, and 
always
 dehumanizing. This breeds fear, anxiety, and mistrust, which are the polar opposite of the feelings that people have on highly effective teams. Fortunately, a growing number of large companies having figured out that annual ratings are nothing more than garbage in, garbage out.
Recently, consulting firms Accenture and Deloitte ended their formal annual review processes. Microsoft did away with what is arguably the worst of all review processes: stacked rankings. With 6% of Fortune 500 companies moving away from annual performance ratings, there is some question about what new process will replace it. But this misses the point completely: you don’t cure cancer by replacing it with a different type of cancer!
With annual reviews and ratings out of the picture, the focus can now instead be on handling the real issue, which is how to keep employees happy with their level of responsibility and pay, rewarding both individual and team performances. Again, the key here is to transfer power from the C-suite back to people managers. This can be achieved by training all people managers to give regular and timely feedback, allowing them to have more discretion over merit pay increases and incentive compensation awards, and further allow promotions to occur on more of an ad hoc (and as needed!) basis.
If you liked this post, please share it and click the FOLLOW button to get more!
Devin C. Hughes is currently chief inspiration officer of the International Thought Leader Network. Devin shares enchanting stuff on the topics of happiness, motivation, diversity/inclusion, change and productivity.