This Google Memo Kerfuffle Is Exactly Why We Can’t Have a Serious Discussion About DiversityW
hen James Damore clicked the “send” button that would circulate his controversial 10-page memo to Google employees, it only took a few days until it became the latest panicked hubbub within a rabble of bomb-throwers, squabbling their pixie shrills of manufactured dismay.
It’s becoming more difficult each day to have a rational public discussion about anything, especially workplace diversity.
The media peddles controversy to egg on the ideologues searching for a 
raison d’être 
to blow up people’s Twitter feeds: The left generally doesn’t tolerate any thoughtcrime that deviates from its newspeak on fostering diversity, while some on the right either mitigates the presence of sexism or outright denies it.
The document was meant to be a conversation-starter, but that voice was tangled in the pearl-clutching of ideological Puritans clamoring to toss another witch into the rushing rivers of outrage.
Titled “Google’s Ideological Echo Chamber,” the document was first posted to an internal company forum on August 4, and immediately went viral among employees. It was then leaked to the media over the weekend, setting off a firestorm of outrage and debate while highlighting the company’s 
ongoing struggles
 to meaningfully diversify its workforce.
Damore was subsequently fired for “perpetuating gender stereotypes.”
The memo was leaked to Gizmodo, which published the document in full. The media outlet removed every single one of Damore’s extensive links and graphs, which provided data and research to substantiate his argument. At its worst, it reads like a bad blog post. There is absolutely no reason for a site to erase that context, other than to vilify the author and make his argument look like an unhinged rant from some alt-right bigot who kneels at the shrine of George Wallace.
Exclusive: Here's The Full 10-Page Anti-Diversity Screed Circulating Internally at Google
gizmodo.com
A barrage of headlines across an array of media outlets followed, proclaiming that at least one Google employee was so antagonistic to women, that he had the gall to distribute a “anti-diversity screed” — a completely fair-and-balanced label, by the way.
Similar language was used in headlines at 
Fox News
, 
CNN
, 
ABC News
, 
the BBC
, 
NBC News
, 
Time
, 
Slate
, 
Engadget
, 
The Huffington Post
, 
PBS
, 
Fast Company
, and beyond.
CNN classified the memo as an “anti-diversity manifesto,” and tweeted that it “argues women aren’t suited for tech jobs.” Such an argument didn’t appear once in the memo. Either CNN’s reporters decided to write about the memo without caring to read it, or they intentionally misrepresented its content.
The 
New York Times
 
wrote an article entitled
, “Google Fires Engineer Who Wrote Memo Questioning Women in Tech,” and the AP’s first report on the memo called it “sexist,” as they took Damore’s remarks out of context.
The Guardian
 
referred to it
 as an “anti-diversity memo.” 
Vox
 
called it
 a “sexist screed… arguing for less emphasis on gender diversity in the workplace,” and describing its publication as an act of “hostility.”
News outlets have routinely chosen to slander Damore as “anti-diversity” and to obfuscate his argument to make it appear that he’s arguing women shouldn’t be allowed to work at tech companies.
The balance of the memo is that he’s not against pursuing greater gender diversity at Google; he opposes the current means Google is using to pursue that end.
Whether one regards Damore’s suggestions as brilliant or rooted in pernicious gender stereotypes, it’s ridiculous to assert that he’s “anti-diversity” — the author is clearly suggesting tactics to increase diversity in a manner he regards as having a greater probability of success. “I strongly believe in gender and racial diversity, and I think we should strive for more,” he stated explicitly.
The author specifically objects to what his memo calls “discriminatory” means to achieve gender diversity, then adds that he has concrete suggestions for changes at Google that would “increase women’s representation in tech without resorting to discrimination.”
Maybe the author’s proposed remedies would lead to less gender diversity at the company if it were adopted. But whether out of sloppiness or maliciousness, the media misreported Damore’s central argument, short-handing his position as “anti-diversity.”
To object to a means of achieving X is not to be anti-X.
Casually perusing “anti-diversity” headlines without reading the memo might mislead readers into thinking a “sexist” Google employee assigned a negative value to gender diversity, when he actually praised its merits, but objected to some ways it was being pursued.
As a result, Damore has become the dubious martyr defiant of political correctness to those who continue to maintain that sexism isn’t a pervasive problem in the American work force, while many on the left bludgeons any dialogue that poses an existential threat to progressive dogma.
Meanwhile, a substantive conversation about diversity suffers.T
here are two universally accepted truths about women and STEM careers (science, technology, engineering, and math).
Over the years, the 
National Science Foundation
 has undergone a national effort to attract girls and young women into STEM.
Based on 
NSF statistics
, over the last two decades, there is no gender difference in the biosciences, social sciences, mathematics, and very little difference in physical sciences when looking at the percentage of STEM bachelor’s degrees awarded to female students. The only STEM fields in which men drastically outnumber women are in computer science, and engineering.
At the Ph.D. level and in 
the actual workforce
, we see the same pattern.
This leads to one interpretation of the gender disparity in STEM: Females are pressured into areas that are more “gender appropriate,” not that they are choosing to study what is intrinsically more interesting to them.
For example, former American Association of University Women senior researcher Andresse St. Rose, one of the authors of “
Why So Few? Women in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics,
” puts it 
this way
:
But there are developmental studies that also challenge this “blank slate” interpretation. 
Newborn girls prefer
 to look at faces while newborn boys choose to look at mechanical stimuli (such as mobiles). 
Consistent findings
 show that boys strongly prefer to play with mechanical toys over plush toys or dolls, while girls show equivalent interest in the two.
These sex-linked preferences emerge in human development long before any significant socialization can have taken place — they even exist in non-human primates that are not exposed to human gender-specific socialization efforts.
It’s not difficult to see how such early emerging preferences could play some part in shaping career choices later on. Generally speaking, women tend to gravitate toward fields that focus on living things and agents, men to fields that focus on objects.
This seems to underscore a point made in a 
Stanford Medical 
article published earlier this year. It noted women, 
on average
, excel in several measures of verbal ability, while outperforming men in reading comprehension, writing ability, fine-motor coordination, perceptual speed, and retrieving information from long-term memory.
Men, 
on average
, are better at visualizing what happens when a complicated two- or three-dimensional shape is rotated in space, at correctly determining angles from the horizontal, at tracking moving objects and at aiming projectiles.
How men’s and women’s brains are different
The cognitive differences between men and women
stanmed.stanford.edu
The article states:
Both the Stanford study and Damore’s memo clearly articulate that while cognitive differences between the male and female brain can shape behavior and preferences, they are small. They also state men and women overlap so frequently, it’s nearly impossible to judge an individual based on population distributions — it just serves to partially explain general trends.
Wharton organization psychology professor Adam Grant 
cites
 
128 domains
 of the mind and behavior, which further illustrates this point: “78 percent of gender differences are small or close to zero.”
The male variability hypothesis — a claim that men have a wider distribution of intellectual ability on the Bell Curve — asserts there are more men in the upper and lower tails of the intelligence distribution. This idea has kicked around since the 19th century, buffered by the fact that most major scientific contributions in the 20th century came from men, although women mostly pioneered the use of the personal computer.
The Forgotten Female Programmers Who Created Modern Tech
 
www.npr.org
But 100 years ago, a fierce debate raged: Are men naturally smarter or is it a byproduct of social conditioning? If it was purely social, the distributions would look more similar today because attitudes and access to education have changed.
Using several different measures of intelligence including 
IQ
 and SAT scores, more men are found in the high and low tails, even during these enlightened times.
Josh Aronson, a professor of applied psychology at NYU, says:
Professor 
Gina Rippon
, a neuroscientist at Aston University in Birmingham, has extensively studied cognitive differences between men and women. Her work suggests that, in many cases, the differences between male and female performance, if present, are very small. They can disappear with training and are not consistent across cultures.
In one study, Rippon found that British men performed significantly better on a spatial rotation task than women. However, when the experiment was repeated with Chinese participants, there was no difference between the male and female participants. She points to another study, which showed that differences in personality traits between men and women varied wildly across countries, depending on the status of women in that society.
Researchers at Duke
 studied SAT scores of intellectually promising 7th graders (ages 12 to 13) over the last 30 years.
Up to the top 1 percent (#FeelTheBern), boys and girls are nearly equal. This is affirmed by nearly 
4,000 studies
, which shows the average gender gap in math achievement is not statistically different from zero. The two sexes have very similar variances, with men showing slightly more variability.
But the higher into the tail, the bigger the differences — and the boys dominate. However, this is a very diminutive cohort — 0.01 percent. In the 1980s, there were 13.5 boys for every girl in the top 0.01 percent, now there are only 3.8. The decline shows a large share of the gap was social conditioning, whether because of girls were discouraged from taking difficult math classes or being told that they were inadequate. There’s 
studies
 that suggest elementary school biases do affect math test scores.
But a significant gap remains — some of it signaling a greater effort is needed to promote diversity in STEM, some of it raising more uncomfortable questions about differences in innate ability.
Dave Lubinski, a psychology professor at Vanderbilt University, also studies the SAT scores of precocious 7th graders and tracks their career trajectories. With the oldest cohort now 50 years old, he says once the population is narrowed to the 1 percenters in math, boys score slightly higher:
This suggests women may be less likely to be extreme math stars, but they display a more well-rounded intelligence. It’s difficult to balkanize what’s biological and environmental, because intelligence reflects what someone studies and how intensely they pursue it, regardless of gender. People tend to be drawn toward what they’re good at and what they have access to.
Lubinski and his coauthors observed that women are more interested in working with people and jobs that prize communication. Many talented women, for a number of reasons including discrimination or just their personal preferences, don’t end up in tech-related jobs.
It’s impossible to completely separate nature from nurture — while different cognitive functions can explain some career choices between men and women, it’s certainly not enough to explain the gender ratios of computer science, and more specifically, Google programmers. American society has undeniably developed around the idea that “real men” are X and “real women” are Y for hundreds of years.
Episode 576: When Women Stopped Coding
Mark Zuckerberg. Bill Gates. Steve Jobs. Most of the big names in technology are men. But a lot of computing pioneers were women.
www.npr.org
The number of enrollments among men and women in computer science were on their way to parity in the 1970s and early 1980s. In 1984, 37 percent of computer science graduates were women, but those numbers began to drop dramatically in the middle of the decade. By 2016, that number has 
been whittled down to 18 percent.
Although a whole 
host of factors
 played a role in this phenomena, Elizabeth Ames from the Anita Borg Institute for Women in Technology believes that one of the primary reasons can be traced back to the close relationship between computing and gaming in the 1980s:
Advertisers sold games to boys because they were the ones buying them; boys bought games in droves because of the advertisers’ targeted marketing. It’s no coincidence that the console touted to have saved the industry was called a “Game Boy.”
For example, during the 1980s, the Apple Macintosh was 
marketed specifically to boys
 (included them teasing girls’ computer skills), as were a whole range of other consoles. This gave rise to male computing culture. As a result, a 
1985 study
 reported that 73 percent of men used a computer on a weekly basis, compared to 45 percent of women surveyed.
Meanwhile, movies like 
Weird Science, Revenge of the Nerds
, 
Back to the Future
, 
Ghostbusters
, and 
War Games
 all came out in the ’80s. Their plot summaries almost interchangeable: Awkward geek boy/man geniuses uses their tech savvy to triumph over adversity and win the girl.
This led to what researcher Jane Margolis calls the “experience gap.” In a study she conducted in 1995, she found that among freshman computer-science students at Carnegie Mellon University, 
40 percent of male respondents passed the AP computer-science exam
, meaning they could skip the introductory-level programming class. None of the first year women achieved the same result.
Men were also more familiar with programming languages than women and were more likely to report having an “expert” level of programming proficiency before enrolling at Carnegie Mellon. Unsurprisingly, many women opted out of the computer-related courses early.
An 
American Association of University Women
 review of more than 380 studies from academic journals, corporations, and government sources found that more early exposure to engineering and computing among boys in school creates “more positive attitudes toward and interest in STEM subjects.”
When students reach university, 20 percent of men plan on embarking on a engineering or computing career path — that number is 5.8 percent among women. Women start out so far behind, they often can’t catch up.
Silicon Valley’s gender gap is the result of computer-game marketing 20 years ago
It’s no secret that there is a pronounced gender gap in technology fields.
qz.com
Nowadays, instances of sexism in tech culture are 
well-documented
 — the 
endless accounts of harassment
 and a 
deeply embedded “bro culture”
 has been 
noted by women across the tech industry
.
Allison Schrager writes of her experience in 
Quartz
:
Google is under investigation by the US Department of Labor, which has accused the technology titan of 
systematically discriminating against women
.
Much of Uber’s top executives have left the company 
amid complaints
 of systematic sexual harassment and gender discrimination while the 
Washington Post 
reports “
Uber’s search for a female CEO has been narrowed down to 3 men
.”
And the tech industry has lately been shaken by allegations that high-profile venture capitalists have abused their position to prey on female startup entrepreneurs.
Why Is Silicon Valley So Awful to Women?
Tech companies are spending hundreds of millions of dollars to improve conditions for female employees. 
www.theatlantic.comT
he few women who do break into computer science are far less likely to stay than their male counterparts. The Center for Talent Innovation, a research think tank, 
found
 that US women are 45 percent more likely to leave careers in technology.
According to the research, women often feel isolated due to a lack of female role models and the sense of being excluded from male networks. Furthermore, 
38 percent of US women get their ideas endorsed by leadership
 (compared to 44 percent of men). This causes a scenario in which almost one-third of women say they want to quit within the first year.
In 2015, 
IdeasFisherman
 created the following visual using 
data from the United States Department of Labor
 to show the disproportionate representation of women in certain jobs:
Many of these fields are more personable and offer better work-life balance than tech-related jobs. Even so, women have always 
entered male-dominated fields
 — usually well-paid, professional ones — more than men enter female-dominated ones. There are now many female lawyers, but male nurses are still rare — nine out of 10 registered nurses are female.
One reason is that these “pink-collar” jobs, 
especially caregiving jobs
, have always had 
lower pay
 and perceived lower status.
Women have seen more success in breaking out of their gender spheres than males.
Andrew Cherlin, a sociologist and public policy professor at Johns Hopkins and author of “Labor’s Love Lost: The Rise and Fall of the Working-Class Family in America,” says:
Much of men’s resistance to pink-collar jobs is intertwined with the culture of masculinity, say people who study the issue. Women are assumed to be empathetic and caring; men are supposed to be strong, tough and able to support a family.
The men America left behind
Overall, men who conform to traditional masculine norms have higher rates of mental health problems.
www.apa.org
When assessing why unemployed working-class white men — who have been displaced from their manufacturing jobs — are reluctant to pursue a pink-collar job, Lawrence Katz, an economist at Harvard, coined the term: “
retrospective wait unemployment
.” He says:
The 
American Psychology Association
 reached a similar conclusion:
Even if competition and drive for status is biological, it’s definitely exasperated and perpetuated through culture.
In a 
2009 study
, a team of economists from the universities of Chicago and Maryland conducted field experiments in two vastly different cultures: One among the 
Khasi people 
of Meghalaya, where property and status is inherited through women, and the other was conducted in the Arusha region of Tanzania among the Maasai people, a 
strict patriarchal society
.
The study 
appears to show
 that competition isn’t based in biology, but culture.
Why Men Don’t Want the Jobs Done Mostly by Women
www.nytimes.com
The push to eliminate the gender gaps in traditionally male-dominated fields is propped up by a hidden assumption that these jobs are intrinsically more important and more valuable to society than careers that traditionally appeal to women. Therefore, this logic would dictate that women emulate more masculine qualities to achieve economic parity.
Facebook’s COO Sheryl Sandberg writes in her book, “Lean In,” more women need to get “in the door” of male-dominated, prestigious, and high-paying fields, even if doing so requires that more women act like men.
If women heed this advice and follow the “lure” of prestige and wealth offered by male-dominated professions, what effect does this have? Kate Bahn writes in her blog 
The Lady Economist
:
Psychologist Denise Cummins 
poses two questions
:
Nursing or teaching surely has as much, if not more, intrinsic value to society than trading stocks, yet nurses and teachers make a fraction of what high-frequency traders make.
When men, especially white men, enter female-dominated fields, they are paid more and promoted faster than women, a phenomenon known as 
the glass escalator
. While the percentage of male nurses increased from a minuscule three percent in 1970 to 10 percent in 2011: 
a gender pay gap 
developed. In 2011, the average female nurse earned $51,100, 16 percent less than the $60,700 earned by the average man in the same job.
Carefully designed experimental economics studies
 have amply demonstrated that women undervalue themselves, and their work by extension. The dictator and ultimatum games are frequently studied economic indicators of this finding.
In the dictator game, one individual is given full authority to keep or share a sum of money with another player. On average, women keep less for themselves than men do. In the ultimatum game, one person is allowed to make an offer as to how the money should be divided, and the other party is given the opportunity to accept or reject the offer. If the offer is rejected, no one gets any money. 
Both men and women
 make lower offers to women than to men.
Other studies have found that 
women negotiated harder
 when they were working on behalf of others rather than for themselves, which implies a reluctance to push their own interests.
Cummins states:
Of course, none of this excuses the gender disparity within Silicon Valley.
In 2014, 70 percent of the employees at 
the top tech companies
 in Silicon Valley, such as Google, Facebook, and Twitter, were male. In technical roles, this phenomenon is even more pronounced; for example, only 10 percent of the technical workforce at Twitter is female.
By its 
own accounting
, Google’s workforce is 69 percent male and 2 percent African American, while 20 percent of technical jobs are held by women. The company tends to hire white and Asian men over women and other racial minorities. Google may be unequivocal about its “belief” in diversity, but the figures make its shortcomings clear. At this point, it’s nothing more than a PR stunt.
An industry that’s 
approaching 7 million workers
 could benefit from greater gender diversity.
How Diversity Can Drive Innovation
Most managers accept that employers benefit from a diverse workforce, but the notion can be hard to prove or quantify.
hbr.org
There’s considerable evidence that 
diversity
 in the workplace is 
good for businesses
. 
Inc
’s Ian Altman 
lists five reasons
 why businesses can benefit from diversity:
Why diversity matters
New research makes it increasingly clear that companies with more diverse workforces perform better financially. 
www.mckinsey.comE
ven if this manifesto was misguided or narrow-minded, it was a humbly submitted alternative to Google’s current initiatives — company policies that have failed to deliver its desired goals of greater workplace gender diversity.
Psychology’s Favorite Tool for Measuring Racism Isn’t Up to the Job
Perhaps no new concept from the world of academic psychology has taken hold of the public imagination more quickly and…
nymag.com
Damore basically argued if Google can’t change people, they can change job descriptions. Instead of convincing women to pursue tech jobs they may not want, why not make these jobs more appealing to women? Nothing in the memo suggests that women weren’t biologically suited to excel in the tech industry, or at Google. He simply said women don’t 
prefer
 tech jobs in their current form.
Danielle Brown, Google’s Vice President of Diversity, Integrity & Governance (which has to be the most Orwellian job title in America), didn’t see it that way. She issued an internal memo to employees in response to Danmore’s memo and his eventual firing.
Note that Brown said “incorrect,” not “we disagree,” in a nasty letter sent to the entire company without telling employees what the underlying material was.
She also added, “Changing a culture is hard, and it’s often uncomfortable.” It seems like it’s only uncomfortable for people she disagrees with.
Would Brown say the same if another individual made a different manifesto pushing the idea that there aren’t enough disabled black transgender lesbians who identify as a non-binary, non-gender individual? Or would Brown applause the initiative for “fighting the good fight” because it fits into her ideology? In both instances, the person can be seen criticizing their coworkers.
Damore’s memo caused a public relations fire storm that has only magnified public scrutiny on its diversity issues. A former 
senior engineer wrote
 that Damore created a “textbook hostile work environment” for women in the office. Google is a private corporation, and is within their right to fire their employees if they are a liability to the company, although they could be facing a lawsuit.
The Guy Who Wrote the ‘Google Memo’ Just Might Sue
www.wired.com
Conservatives defending Damore should step outside of their own mental loop around political correctness and ask themselves, do they really want to impede a company’s discretion to fire employees? If he said or done anything else, conservatives would argue if Damore doesn’t like Google’s ideological chamber, he should quit and work for another company, and businesses that cripple themselves with political correctness will fail on the open market.
Freedom of speech doesn’t exonerate anyone from its consequence — Damore is no exception. But everything that’s transpired from his memo would only suggest that Google’s problems extend further than its gender diversity; now it faces a conundrum with its ideological diversity.
Add this controversy to the never-ending four-minute warning that whips liberals and conservatives into a panic before they sharpen their sabers and collect their stones, as they search for another way to stroke their victimization complexes. All coming from a gross negligence in reporting that either borders on journalistic malpractice or was a deep cynical ploy to write sensationalist clickbait headlines that strawmans (sorry, should it be strawpersons?) and completely distorts the content and intent of the memo.
Either way, any rational discussion of the importance of diversity has been completely soiled in its present state. Which is a shame, because it’s good for business, and for society — with most liberals and conservatives in agreement. It’s just a matter of how to best promote it.
When the cyberdust settles, and people have a clearer perspective on the current state of political and social discourse, we should take a look at this passage from Damore’s memo.
It’s an interesting place, this planet we’re on.