How Twitter can solve its new user and monetization problem
Twitter, as a company, is not in a good place. The platform’s problems with appealing to new users are well known, and there seems a fairly wide-held consensus that the platform struggles to be relevant to users beyond a small circle of professional news junkies, and a few other niche groups. Twitter’s advertising products are also struggling to generate the revenue demanded by its investors, with digital advertising instead being diverted in ever-increasing sums to Facebook and Google.
The following is a suggestion for how Twitter might become more useful to a wider range of users, and by doing so also unlock new monetization opportunities. By the standards of social media platforms, the proposed changes are reasonably drastic. Moreover, there will certainly be a number of unanticipated technical, design and structural challenges that would need to be overcome for this to be implemented. I don’t pretend that I have all the answers, but I hope that this is an interesting thought-starter.
Before discussing Twitter, it first might be helpful to take an overview of WeChat, the phenomenally successful social media platform that is ever-present in China (for ease of comprehension, all screenshots are from the English version of WeChat).
This is the screen you see when you open WeChat. It lists all IM conversations that you are involved in, in order of most recent first. There is a menu at the bottom of the screen with four buttons. The first is “WeChat”, which the user back to this page from other pages.
The second is “Contacts”, which takes you to a list of all of your messaging contacts on the platform (and “Official Accounts”, which is a subject for another time).
The third is “Discover”, which takes you to a sub-menu featuring a wide range of options.
For the sake of brevity, I will only discuss one of these further: “Moments”. When a user selects “Moments”, they are then taken to a Facebook-style newsfeed, featuring updates from your contacts. These typically include videos, images or links to articles (as an interesting aside, text-only updates are not permitted).
Returning to the main menu, the fourth button is “Me”. This takes the user to another sub-menu with a series of further options. For the purposes of this article, most of these are irrelevant. However, we will return to “Wallet” later.
Turning our attention to Twitter, I propose re-designing the mobile app to
1) Give a much greater focus to instant messaging (i.e. Twitter’s Direct Messaging feature), as this is a more obviously useful and valuable service to casual users than the Twitter feed
2) Focus on a new WeChat-inspired feature which we shall call “TwitterPay” (more on this later).
In my redesign of the Twitter mobile app, the feed remains the landing page. However, at the bottom of the landing page is now a new menu with three buttons: “Twitter Feed”, “Messaging” and “TwitterPay”. The “Twitter Feed” button takes the user to their feed .
The “Messaging” button takes them to them to their Messages page. This is not a huge departure from the existing Twitter app. However, this small design change should make instant messaging feel like much more of an integral part of the app, rather than a bolt-on (which it currently feels like).
The final button, “TwitterPay”, requires a bit more explanation.
To return to WeChat, one of the features that has caused the platform to become so embedded in day-to-day Chinese life is the ability to use it to make payments. As an example, a user wanting to pay for groceries at a local store using WeChat would open their app and select “Me”
Then select “Wallet”
Then “Money”, where a QR code is generated
(n.b Elements altered / obscured for security reasons)
The vendor would then scan the QR code or barcode (either with their own phone or a barcode scanner), and the payment is then deducted from the users’ WeChat Pay float, which is itself tied to a card.
WeChat also allows users to send money directly via instant messaging. To do this, users simply go to an active conversation, click the “+” button and select “Transfer”
Input their desired amount
And then input their private pin number
Once the recipient accepts payment, it is then transferred to their account.
My belief is that Twitter’s status as an app that is widely downloaded (if infrequently used by many), with an already built-in IM component would mean that adding a WeChat-style TwitterPay service would make the service much more useful to everyday users, and encourage further downloads and more frequent use. Whilst there are already apps such as ApplePay and Venmo that already offer this service, Twitter has a number of advantages:
1) The Twitter app is already widely downloaded, and Twitter has a strong brand. This means that barriers to adoption would be lower, as Twitter only needs to persuade existing users to use the new feature, not persuade huge numbers of new users to download and use a completely new app.
2) As the example of WeChat shows, users value an e-payment service that is already bundled into a social media app that they regularly use.
3) As the example of WeChat shows, the combination of e-payments and instant messaging functions have mutually reinforcing benefits. Should TwitterPay become widespread, it is likely that Twitter would become more useful and popular as an instant messaging service.
4) The data gathered from TwitterPay would allow Twitter to offer new, more compelling services to advertisers. This will help the platform generate revenue.
5) TwitterPay would also create space for more imaginative monetization strategies. For example, by allowing brands to sell products directly through Twitter, or by taking a small cut of large financial transactions taking place over the platform (which is something WeChat already does in China).
This article makes a pivot towards instant messaging and e-payment sound very simple. However, I am aware that there would be significant challenges — particularly around security, regulation and cross-border transactions. Regardless, I think the success of WeChat shows that Twitter could benefit hugely from diversifying the range of services it offers to users. I believe this proposal would achieve this without compromising the key functionality beloved by its core base of heavy users — the Twitter feed itself.