Recipe: Doing Your Job Well And Feeling Fairly Compensated For It
A while ago in an internet company I used to work for, there was a long email thread debating the right approach to having “that conversation” about pay and performance with one’s manager. It has always been a difficult one. There is a hair’s breadth balance to strike between the ‘ask for everything in case you don’t get anything’ approach and the ‘let your work speak for itself and good things will happen’ approach. My suggestion is to do a bit of both. So here is a recipe that I think ties it all together.
Ingredients (no substitutes exist for any ingredient below, unfortunately):
— open relationship with manager
— space for discussion
— time for discussion
— common context
— trust
— respect
Method:
1.) Seek clarity from your manager about what their expectations of you operating in your role are, say through a regular 1:1 meeting.
2.) Give your manager clarity around what your expectations are from your current job, overall career and salary progression, say through the same 1:1.
3.) Do your job the best you can, taking care to keep your manager up to date of the context you are operating within.
4.) Over time, continue the conversation about your role, your career and salary progression whilst doing the job. You don’t have to have this conversation every day, but having it at least once enables you to refer back to it when you need to. Eg. ‘Remember that time we talked about my career and salary and you said you would need to see more of X, Y and Z before we could look at increasing my salary? Can we talk about X, Y and Z again? I have been focusing on these things and feel I have made progress’.
5.) Realise that this is difficult to get right and acknowledge yourself for having the initial conversation about expectations, because 
that
 is important.
6.) Doing well? Feeling fairly compensated?
— If no, start back at step 1 (checking carefully to make sure you have all the ingredients first.)
— If yes, start back at step 1 (check carefully to make sure you still have all the ingredients you need.)
NB: if you are missing an ingredient, focus on finding that first before starting the recipe, tempting as it might seem…..