Measuring performance in a small business
Sir Andrew Likierman, Dean of the London Business School wrote this in his article “Five Traps of Performance Measurement” which got published in the Harvard Business Review.
In an episode of Frasier, the television sitcom that follows the fortunes of a Seattle-based psychoanalyst, the eponymous hero’s brother gloomily summarizes a task ahead: “Difficult and boring — my favorite combination.” If this is your reaction to the challenge of improving the measurement of your organization’s performance, you are not alone. In my experience, most senior executives find it an onerous if not threatening task. Thus they leave it to people who may not be natural judges of performance but are fluent in the language of spreadsheets. The inevitable result is a mass of numbers and comparisons that provide little insight into a company’s performance and may even lead to decisions that hurt it. That’s a big problem in the current recession , because the margin for error is virtually nonexistent.
The biggest problem with performance measurement in small businesses is we try to do it like a big business, and hence fall into the same mistakes, but unlike the big businesses, we really can’t afford the mistakes.
When you are a firm with about 50 employees or less, then measuring performance should simply be measuring work. No 360 degrees or BARS crap. You simply agree on what needs to be done, and measure how well it is done.
Actually, what I speak of here is not new, it is the classic Management by Objective (MBO) from the 60's. Straightforward and effective.
The way it works is simple.
The process starts with defining specific objectives within the firm that managers can convey to all employees, then deciding on how to achieve each objective in sequence. These objectives could be annual, quarterly or monthly goals depending on the firm.
It is a demanding and rewarding style of management. It concentrates attention on the accomplishment of objectives through participation of all employees, i.e., through team spirit. MBO is based on the assumption that people perform better when they know what is expected of them and can relate their daily tasks to firm’s objectives.
Bill Packard, one of the two founders of Hewlett-Packard, said of MBO:
No operating policy has contributed more to Hewlett-Packard’s success … MBO … is the antithesis of management by control. The latter refers to a tightly controlled system of management of the military type … Management by objectives, on the other hand, refers to a system in which overall objectives are clearly stated and agreed upon, and which gives people the flexibility to work toward those goals in ways they determine best for their own areas of responsibility.
One key benefit of MBO is it helps employees to see their accomplishments as they achieve each objective, which reinforces a positive work environment and a sense of achievement, this significantly improves employee motivation and commitment.
In the middle of writing this, I realised it isn’t in my place to sell Management By Objectives to you, I bet you already love the idea. The real challenge with MBO is execution. Basically, “how do I implement MBO in my firm?”.
There are two parts to implementing MBO.
First, there is the “setting the objectives” part, then there is the “measuring the objective”. Most are comfortable with the first part, the second is where the problem is, because it requires some sort of information system or software.
Well, the good thing about Seegad measuring the cost of work is it inadvertently has to measure the work, making it the ideal solution for measuring the work people do against the firm’s objectives.
You are not going to find a more ideal management information system to measure actual performance and achievements against defined objectives; Period.
Seegad allows you measure against 4 kinds of objectives — Total Income, Resource Utilization, Billable Utilization, Task Completion Rate, and we intend to add more as we get feedback. Additional information on using the objectives feature can be found on our knowledge portal.
If you want to speak with us about Seegad, you can click here to pick a date/time that would be convenient. If you would rather just “dive in” yourself, you can easily signup here and we’ve got a great online guide here.
If you are a small business owner who has a vague feeling that your business may be adrift, you should look into MBO as a way of reviving focus. You will probably benefit from reading one or two books on the subject, including the original material on the subject, “The Practice of Management”, from the father of modern management, Peter Drucker,— and then trying the method on yourself.
MBO was originally conceptualised as a management tool for managers — the managers presumed to be inherently motivated. MBO works well when its principles are internalised. It tends to fail when it is imposed. Its great benefits lie in the planning that it requires. In the case of the small business, corporate plans and the owner’s personal plans often coincide, thus giving MBO ideal scope.
The requirement of formulating measurable objectives is a good discipline. And “working the plan” with “self-control” applied, may produce quite tangible benefits. Experience with this technique, more than 50 years old and counting, indicates that committed management involvement is vital for success. If the MBO works well for you, your own enthusiasm may act infectiously on other managers in the business.