Planning & Implementing a 360 Feedback Program — Part I
Are you planning a 360 feedback program?
It’s more than the feedback questionnaire, though.
Have you talked to your employees about the purpose of the 360 feedback exercise?
What is being measured and evaluated about an employee?
What are the roles & responsibilities of the participant that is giving feedback?
As with most strategic & sensitive projects, communication is an absolute critical aspect that drives the success of a 360 feedback program.
In this article, we will identify the key aspects that need to be thought out, articulated and communicated properly prior to the execution of the 360 Feedback program.
Purpose
This is to answer WHY — the most critical aspect prior to the implementation of the 360 feedback program.
If the purpose of the exercise is not uniformly clear to the key individuals/team driving this, then outcomes are bound to be quite disappointing and in some cases, disastrous.
Here are the key questions to ask & answer –
Why is the 360 Feedback program being implemented?
How is it going to help an individual employee and collectively, the organization?
What are the key Management drivers for this program?
How will feedback data be analyzed and be effectively used for the future?
Typically, 360 Feedback programs are used to
Identify areas of employee development
Plan & prioritize training calendar.
Complement a Performance Appraisal process
Plan for leadership succession
Conduct root cause analysis on a specific performance problem.
The above is just an indicative list, but your purpose is specific to the unique needs of your company.
Dig deep & persist till you know why exactly you are doing this.
Process
Now that you are sure and clear as to why you are doing the 360 Feedback, let’s look at the 
HOW.
Well, we all know there is a questionnaire involved and a report to be given in the end. But is that really so simple?
So, let’s look at some of the key questions to ask & answer
What are the different stakeholder categories that will provide feedback? i.e. Seniors, Juniors, Peers, etc. Can External stakeholders participate, like, Customers etc?
How many from each category can participate? Will there be a minimum & maximum limit?
What is being measured and how will these be measured? Do we measure competencies, behaviors or values of individuals?
Again, everyone can’t measure everything, like a Junior won’t be in the best position to judge specific competencies of a Manager. So, who rates or measures what?
Who will decide who reviews whom? Will employees set unilaterally, or will Managers have a say? Or, will Managers set on behalf of employees?
Will there be a limit on the number of employees any person can give feedback to?
Typically, in 360 Feedback programs
Feedback is sought from all categories i.e. Seniors, Juniors and Peers, for an employee. After all, only then can it become 360!
There is a limit on the maximum number of feedback providers. So, for example, an employee cannot choose more than 5 of his peers to give feedback. Similarly, he/she will have to choose at least 3 seniors to give feedback.
To keep things simple, an uniform feedback form is provided across all categories of feedback providers. But, it makes more sense to customize the questionnaire according to the profile of the feedback giver.
Employees usually select their feedback providers. After all, they are in the best position to know who they have worked with closely and whose feedback matters really.
Yes, each of these aspects needs to be openly discussed, debated before laying down the policy for the feedback program.
Some say Process is the King. Indeed, if the process is well-thought and implemented to the T, things become really simple henceforth.
The Questionnaire
Okay, you have now answered the most difficult existential questions — the WHY & the HOW for the 360 Feedback.
Well done! But the job’s going to get tougher as now is the time to design the questionnaire to get feedback on.
So, here are the key questions to ask & answer:
What are we measuring — Competencies, Values, Behaviors? If so, what is the laundry list for each/all of these? I.e. What is the whole list of competencies that we are evaluating employees on?
For each measurable parameter, what is the best way to describe it to make it simple to the rater to understand? So, if we are measuring communication, what is it about Communication that we want raters to focus on and measure?
How will measurement happen? What rating scales to be used? Ratings can be on frequency (always, never,often, etc), effectiveness(good, ok, bad, etc) or agreement(Fully agree, partially agree, etc).
Are we collecting qualitative feedback in the form of open ended responses? What are such questions that we need to ask and who can answer what?
Do we have one general questionnaire or customized to the profile of the employee & the feedback provider?
Typically, in 360 Feedback programs, the Questionnaire
Has a balanced number of questions that captures quality inputs as well as not cause rater fatigue. Most cases, there are around 10 attributes to rate and 3–5 open ended questions to answer.
Attributes to be rated are always described in a sentence or two, such that nothing is left to the perception of the rater. The purpose is clear on what is to be rated and what qualifies for a high rating against low.
A minimum 3 to a maximum 5 point rating scale is used, depending on what is the rating type. If the rating is on effectiveness, a 3 point rating scale is simple and effective too. On the other hand, if the rating is on agreement, more rating points are advisable.
Qualitative feedback is almost always sought. Ratings can be interpreted in many ways by the organization & individual. But words & paragraphs as feedback to a specific question, provides a lot of depth to the quality and helps the employee understand more.
In most cases, there is one questionnaire that fits all profiles of employee and feedback provider. This is usually done to aid effective & comparative analysis of employees on the parameters they are being evaluated.
The Questionnaire is the instrument that will help you collect the data that you want about the employees. This just cannot go wrong. Once it’s out, the questionnaire can’t be changed. There is no second take.
Thus, it is always advisable that a pilot is done on a focus group before the full launch. This plays a good trial and typically, throws up issues that were not thought of. A well-executed pilot always aids the success of the final 360 feedback program.
So, there you go.
We covered the critical 3 pillars that need to be built up before the 360 feedback program — The Purpose, The Process & The Questionnaire.
We at 
360fdbk.com
 help you in executing a 360 Feedback program to the T. Right from defining the process to piloting and finetuning before full launch, 360fdbk provides you with all the tools you need to make your program a grand success.
In the next part of this series, we will look at the things to plan & do after the 360 Feedback is conducted.
Originally published at 
360fdbk.com
 on August 28, 2016.
To know more, log on to 360Fdbk.com to see how you can conduct a 360 Degree Feedback and find the hidden leadership skills.