Look at those (non bell-)curves. Photo credit: Hufton + Crow
Is Your Performance Management Approach Destroying Performance?
And Three Easy Tips to Cure That
“His promises were, as he then was, mighty; But his performance, as he is now, nothing.”– W. Shakespeare
Your organization is likely to shrink and disappear in the long run.
Over the past seven decades, the proportion of organizations that are still competitive has dwindled. In the 1950s, a company listed on the S&P 500 could expect to exist for 60+ years. Today, that life expectancy has dwindled to 14 years. We’re living in a period of political economic, social, and technological change that is exerting more pressure on organizations to operate at peak levels of performance — 1) to sustain their share price and quarterly profits, 2) to maintain their high performance on the long run.
Only a third of organizations remain relevant high performers over time. Part of that depends on how successful they are in navigating macroeconomic changes, industry factors and yes, pure luck. But it turns out that these only play a minor part in sustaining the organization. According to a McKinsey study between 1982 and 2006, 70% of the performance between companies is 
firm-specific 
— this includes negative employee attitudes and unproductive management behavior, among other factors.
It is easy today for organizations, departments, or teams to mimic a successful strategy without actually making sustainable positive change. We know that in complex systems like organizations, cities, and the human body, health is systemic. Best practices for one part of the system can be maladaptive when introduced to another part of the system.
The Never Changing Performance Management System
Take performance management systems. Look across any organization today, large and small, anywhere in the world, and you will find that performance management practices theses days are remarkably alike. Most performance management systems have not fundamentally changed since the days of nascent Taylorism.
At a time where the nature of work has fundamentally changed — requiring deeper expertise, better problem solving skills and more creative thinking, our current performance management systems struggle to ascribe and measure value in an increasingly volatile, uncertain, and complex world.
We still rely on the industrial era paradigm to evaluate our work in micro chunks with sophisticated tools like KPIs, the balanced scorecard and triple bottom line reporting. The content may be different from what Frederick Taylor and his colleagues would recognize but the basic underlying paradigm of breaking work into small pieces and measuring it would feel very familiar.
These habits often generate inaccurate information and create a burden for employees across the organization to make sense of performance feedback. We’re all too familiar with the politics, subjectivity, and anxiety that comes with filling in annual reviews. The process is arduous, stressful, and time consuming. The reality is that performance management appraisals end up doing very little to 
actually
 change employee performance.
We are not machines. The idea of rating and ranking people along a 3–5–7 scale is based on the assumption that we humans can objectively rate, assess, or evaluate someone else when research has consistently proven that we are biased by our 
own experience and history when rating other individuals
.
This process which is meant to drive engagement ends up having the opposite impact. It can completely harm the individual and leave them stuck with a label that is largely meaningless. In fact, the only people who benefit from the common stack ranking and rating process are those fortunate enough to be ranked #1. It’s a disheartening and disengaging exercise for the majority of the workforce especially when you consider that past performance is not a guarantee of future results. Even the brightest stars burn out.
Most “innovation” in this space is simply a tweak to the system to make it better for a more complex work environment without necessarily rethinking it from a 
first principles
 basis. Many have tried to get marginally better at doing performance reviews, but very few have fundamentally tried to rethink and reboot the entire process. Most remain stuck in a process that hasn’t changed significantly since the 
Wei dynasty in 230 AD
.
The History of Performance Reviews - infographic
I feel like starting the week lightly, so I'd like to share with you an infographic that I found both well-designed and…
compensationinsider.com
Using Performance Management to 
Actually
 Drive Performance
But new problems require new ways to look at things. Building organizations that can host individuals who are motivated and engaged with the work they do is critically important, particularly when it comes to performance reviews.
Some organizations are beginning to drive this change towards new and varied ways to evaluate employees. 
GE
, Microsoft and Accenture are among those that have gotten rid of their annual systems for ranking employees. Adobe has a frequent check-in programs, while Spotify
 scores their team’s value statements
 every three to six months and uses the data to measure the team’s health. The jury is still out, but, patterns are starting to emerge around how organizations can create the best culture and environment to engage today and tomorrow’s workforce. Here’s are my top three ideas for making that a reality:
Be more transparent about compensation
. Today any prospective employees can check 
Glassdoor.com
 for information about renumeration. Be more proactive instead and publish your salary bands using a mix of variables — experience, speciality, and education. Both 
Buffer
 and 
Stack Overflow
 have publicized their salary calculator. This is probably the fastest hack to create a more transparent and healthy organization as you eliminate a big chunk of misinformation in the system and allow others to put a spotlight on something that needs to be addressed.
Get serious about rewards. 
Current pay for performance models don’t distinguish top performers from the rest. This means the differentiator between those producing more value is not marginally greater than that of an average performer. At Google, compensation for people doing the same work can vary by as much as 500%(!) depending on the size of the outsized contribution by top performers. Identifying and nurturing truly distinctive people is a key priority for Google given their disproportionate impact on the organization’s mission. To better gauge that in your organization, let go of the 
bell curve
 when measuring talent-performance profiles as these often don’t represent reality. Instead, look at how performance profiles are measured in the arts, sports, and academia where a power-law distribution (i.e. the hockey stick graph) can help you pick out the top 20% that is contributing 80% of the performance. Create that differentiation in how you want to recognize talent and separate base pay from contribution pay. Pay for capability and reward for contribution.
Use coaching to get the best form the most. 
Coaching is a great tool to shift the focus of performance reviews from
 backward focused rating
 and ranking towards 
forwards looking coaching
 for development. If we’re willing to accept than in most organizations the majority of employees do a good job but aren’t among the few stars, then developing good coaching programs is a sure way for many organizations to get much higher levels of performance and engagement from 
many
 more of their employees. Frequent coaching programs can help them to constantly evaluate their goals and performance while at the same time building their resilience to take on greater responsibilities, and deepen their expertise in their current roles.
Fear and drama can be draining in the workplace, particularly when the world is changing at such a fast pace and employees have to keep up. The more safety and transparency organizations provide around their culture, the more people will thrive. These performance management tricks are but a small nudge towards more adaptive, meaningful and abundant work habits.Ready for more? 
Join our first 
OS masterclass
 in New York City on October 27th. Grab your tickets 
here
 or 
visit our website
.
Follow me on Twitter
 | 
Follow The Ready on Twitter
 | 
TheReady.com