Trend 10: Continuous Performance Management
After hours of searching, days of reading, and weeks of digesting, I have identified thirteen global trends impacting the world of work in 2017 and beyond. This is part 10 in a series of 13 articles.
A new paradigm for performance measurement and rewards is needed.

(photo credit: Cristeen Quezon)
The world is changing faster than ever, and this means that organizations need more agile approaches to goal setting, performance measurement, and rewards and incentives. The old system of cascading objectives and targets, from the CEO all the way down to the individual worker, is not working anymore. And annual performance appraisals are, for an increasing number of businesses, a thing of the past.
But organizations cannot simply get rid of performance measurement. More than one company has found that lack of performance awareness only makes things worse. In a fast-paced environment, it is even more important than ever to understand how well a business is keeping up with the ever-evolving needs of stakeholders. On top of that, employees want clarity on how they are performing, and they want transparency on how this performance translates to compensation. And more than before, employees want to be evaluated against team goals rather than individual targets.
Many forward-thinking companies are experimenting with new performance management approaches. In the modern world of business, the need to align objectives, measure progress, and get feedback, is continuous and multidirectional. For employee evaluations, companies are shifting from a top-down, process-driven approach to a more agile, feedback-based approach.
A new generation of tools helps managers and workers to do all of this online and in real time. Performance management becomes digital, social, and mobile, and often peer-to-peer and crowd-based. The findings must be used for recognition and rewards in a way that employees consider transparent and fair. This needs to be done both individually and team-based, and in a way that fosters productivity and innovation.
Performance management becomes digital, social, and mobile, and often peer-to-peer and crowd-based.
Companies that are unable to compete in the new age of employer branding, where employee evaluation practices are shared online, and everyone can investigate the organizational cultures of other businesses, will find it very hard to retain their best talent. The best performers will expect the best performance evaluation techniques.
The Agility Scales team is trying to create new ways of measuring organizational transformation. If you want to know more, join our community.
This major trend was derived from the insightful results offered by the authors and publishers of the following reports:
2017 Deloitte Global Human Capital Trends
Accenture Technology Vision 2017
Boston Consulting Group 12 Forces 2017
Bersin-Deloitte — Predictions for 2017
Mercer Talent Trends 2017 Global Study
PWC CEO 20th Survey Report 2017
Randstad Sourceright 2017 Talent Trends Report
Sodexo 2017 Workplace Trends Report