Performance Appraisals: Use it to Make Folks Happy
The Appraisal Season is what most fear more than the winters (Game of Thrones fans like me might disagree), but the appraisal process has tremendous potential to motivate employees, doesn’t it?
Can performance appraisals influence employee engagement?
It’s a well-known fact that a robust performance appraisal system can lead to multiple benefits such as employee retention, higher productivity, and a better company-wide alignment so everyone is working towards the same goals. However, can such a system increase engagement and productivity?
How to use the Performance Appraisal system optimally?
If you’re looking at delivering employee engagement through the performance appraisal system, it is paramount to ensure that managers understand that the end goal is not about ticking all the boxes on an appraisal sheet. Appraisals, like everything else, follow the 80–20 rule. A good appraisal is all about quality conversation — 80% conversation and 20% form-filling will result in increased employee engagement.
How are managers making the employees ‘FEEL’ about the process?
Obviously, performance-based conversations are necessary — but 
what is ‘a quality conversation’ when it comes to appraisals?
Quality conversations follow what I call the 
DECK Framework
 or Desire, Environment, Communication and KPIs.
Desire: 
A quality conversation has to start with the appraiser’s desire to provide a fair and positive appraisal experience. It not only requires accurate analysis of the past performance, but it also needs an honest understanding of the future potential of the employee. It would also be beneficial to have a good idea of how the appraisee perceives his/her performance.
Environment
: Just like all important discussions in life, an appraisal needs the right environment. Have the discussion in private and without interruptions. Put the phone on silent and have a sincere one on one.
Communication
: Use an open style of conversation to understand the employee’s perspective and adjust the tone of your communication to keep the employee engaged throughout the discussion. Focus the feedback on positives, peppered with constructive feedback on areas of development. Offer needed help for development.
KPIs or Key Performance Indicators
: The last and the most important task is to ask the employee about goals for the next year because the ultimate purpose of an appraisal is to provide information back to the management on how and why is an employee valuable to the goals of the company.
If you follow the above performance appraisal process, your employees will feel valued and will feel excited about their work, which will lead to higher engagement, productivity and retention.
Follow me and Recommend this article if you liked it. You can also follow me on 
Twitter
 for regular updates. Connect with me on 
LinkedIn
 to stay in touch.